 
"X"



The Curse of Kalathan

Trina has been thrown into prison for trespassing in the Temple loft - not surprising for someone marked and cursed as she is. What is astonishing, though, is that now that her time is up she is not being thrown back onto the streets: she is being taken, of all places in the whole of Kalathan, to the palace, home of the six princes she has fangirled over all her life.
Theo, eldest of the princes, is convinced that the pilgrimage he has been sent on by his father is a pointless waste of time. But the shrine holds a sinister secret that plunges him, his brothers and the devilclaw Trina into an adventure that will take them across Kalathan and into the Empire, where it will be up to them to challenge the Emperor and his icy daughter for the future of their beloved land.

Prologue
Kalathan. Still, when I say the name of my country my heart swells. What is it, that makes me love the land of my birth? How can a land, an inanimate land, inspire such loyalty and fierce devotion in me? There was a time when Kalathan tried to bury people like me, a time when I was worth less than nothing and was robbed of both my dignity and my freedom. I only have to look down at the mark on my wrist to remember. But then, there was a time when Kalathan needed me, a time when I had a choice: save yourself or save your land. I chose Kalathan.
I remember the deep, dark forests through which I journeyed, and the fertile plains beyond. I see the great river, born high in the Northern peaks, running determinedly past the city towards the great lake in the south and remember how its water was almost the end of me. I picture the desolate mountains in the north, the thirst that almost overcame us, and imagine the vast arid desert beyond them. I see the people, tasselled and embroidered scarves adorning their weathered faces, wrapping themselves in furs against the bitter winter winds, mirrored beads tinkling from the doorways of houses and tents in a summer breeze.
It is a different devotion to the one I have felt as I have gazed at my children after they were put into my arms for the first time, different to the love I have felt for my dear husband as we have walked through life together, as I have watched the hair at his temples turn to grey, as we clasp hands before each meal, our fingers no longer smooth and strong as they were in those early days together. It is different to the love and gratefulness I have to God who has made everything what it is, even Kalathan itself – Kalathan in a way is all of my loves, together. It is home, the source and the beginning of the people I love, it is God’s beautiful creation. It is life, sustenance; it is belonging. It is purpose, for me perhaps more than for others who love this land as I do.
Kalathan is a shadow, I believe, of a land that awaits the faithful beyond the borders of mortality. I once thought I was sacrificing everything for Kalathan, but in the end there was mercy; Kalathan has given me more, far more than I gave up.

Chapter 1
When the door of the prison cell opened that day, flooding her face with light, she had almost given up hope. It had been months, she knew, since the soldiers had caught her sleeping in one of the lofts in the Temple and taken her away, but exactly how long she had been locked up she did not know. She did know that the cold that had settled itself in the dirty stone of the walls and the floor and mercilessly into every square inch of her body, was not quite as intense as it had been. Spring was coming, but it held no hope of warmth or new life for her.
Trina and her cellmates still kept the lumpy grey blankets they had been given wrapped around them all the time, their scratchy shifts completely inadequate against the might of the cold. For the past few days, Trina had found herself losing her determination to survive all this. She had been so sure, months ago, that she could live through it, that she had survived hard things before, and she would do it again. She huddled in a corner on the pile of musty straw, her fingers tracing the inked mark on her left wrist, not wanting for once to talk to the other two. Conversation and story-telling, clapping games and singing had helped to pass the long, icy hours, but as the days grew longer and she began to sense the change in the air, she struggled to stay cheerful. She wanted to be free again, to have choices again so badly that the feeling had settled in her gut like a stone, and she had to force down the dry bread and gritty porridge they were given twice a day.
When they heard the heavy footsteps outside, clearly not those of one of the silent grey women who brought food and emptied the slop buckets, she did not even consider that it could mean they were setting her free. She had been staring up at the window high in the wall, trying to remember what it felt like to be clean and warm. She did not usually allow herself to dwell on such things; it only made the grim reality of the present harder to bear, but today she had given in and let the memories come. The sound of her little sister’s laugh, the feel of a kitten on her lap ... her old life seemed so terribly far away. She was daydreaming about flying up and out of that window, to the little lop-sided cottage in the craft quarter of the city where she had once lived in the days when her father was still alive, in the days before they had waved good bye to him in his soldier’s uniform and watched him walk away from them forever. She longed to be free, but she knew that if she was ever released she didn’t really have anywhere to go. Trina had stayed in the city after they had got the news about Father, while Mother had gone to the country with Rilla, who must be nearly seven now. Mother had wanted her to come with them, to live with their grandparents, but Trina had pretended not to care. She didn’t want to do that to Mother and Rilla, or to her sweet grandparents. Without her, they had a chance at a life without stigma and persecution. It was just better for everyone, she knew, if she took her chances in the city. Alone. But now, when she had spent what must have been months in prison for nothing more than trespassing and loitering in the Temple, she was doubting her decision.
A key grated in the lock and the door opened. The old sentry stood aside and a soldier stood in the doorway, his red turban and tunic a striking contrast to the dim dullness of the cell. When he said her name it was such a surprise that she almost forgot to answer. “Trina Delkarsin,” he said, his voice echoing against the bare walls, his hand on the knife at his belt. He looked around at the three pale women staring up at him. “Which one is Trina?”
“I am,” she said, scrambling to her feet when she realised what he had said. Perhaps Mother had come to visit her. Her heart leapt with that small hope.
“Come with me,” he said, standing to one side of the doorway.
The others looked at her, their eyes wide. She lifted her chin as she reached the soldier, wishing that she wasn’t so dirty, willing herself to remember that she was innocent, that she was not a criminal, that she was more than the bedraggled, smelly girl he must see in front of him. But he barely looked at her, just grabbed her wrist to inspect the mark on it, took her arm and pulled her through the doorway into the courtyard outside.
“Where are you taking me?” she asked, not really expecting an answer.
He shrugged as he locked the door behind him and looked her in the eyes now, smirking, as if what he was about to say was amusing to him. “To the palace, girl,” he said. “I’m taking you to the palace.”

Chapter 2
Theo was mad. He stood with his brothers in front of the king and queen, his arms folded, trying to control the muscles in his face so he wouldn’t betray his frustration. Again, Father was going to make him waste his time on some stupid religious pursuit. There were a thousand things he would rather do than spend a week sitting on a horse, just to feed some poor cow or sheep to a fire in a shrine. He had only yesterday found another old scroll in the archives that he wanted to get stuck into translating, and he needed to keep up with his training if he wanted to beat Kaspar at the archery tournament again this year. Kaspar was nearly five years younger, still a boy really, but he was getting better every day. Theo wasn’t ready to give up his title to his seventeen-year-old scrap of a brother; no way was he going to let that happen. The twins didn’t care; they always did well in the games without training much, but all they really wanted to do was play their silly lutes and flutes and make up songs. If they were all going on this ridiculous pilgrimage, there would be plenty of time for singing and all that along the way. But there was no library on the road to blasted Paristia. Just miles of road, acres of fields and farms and a few dirty inns.
“Father,” he said, looking over at his mother, who had walked over to the window of the high-ceilinged parlour where the family had gathered. She gave him a sympathetic smile, pulling aside a heavy brocade drape to look out over the green courtyard. “Are you sure? I thought things were going better on the border.”
“No, no,” said the king, shaking his head and rubbing his forehead. “They were, for a while, but not lately. There have been rumours about the Empire’s latest plans, and a few unprovoked attacks on the garrisons near the Kirgiz pass. We need the Spirit’s help. We need to prove our devotion.” Father always wore his crown over his turban unless he was in his private apartments, and Theo knew the heavy jewel-encrusted gold was uncomfortable. He had to wear one himself, when they went to worship at the Temple, and he hated it. When I am king, he thought, I will not wear that crown every day. Neither would he wear one of those hot old-fashioned turbans or bother with that line of black kulal under his eyes. And he certainly wouldn’t waste precious time going on pilgrimages to appease spirits that he suspected didn’t care much whether anyone visited them or not. He doubted that appeasing a Spirit would make any difference to what was happening on the border. But he felt guilty, instantly, for his disloyal thoughts. His father was the king, placed and held on the throne by God himself. Even if Theo thought this pilgrimage was unnecessary, whatever his opinions regarding spirits and shows of devotion, that didn’t mean he should doubt his father’s authority and wisdom.
There was a rattling from the corner, a clanking of charms and a rustling of fabric as a figure rose from the chair in the corner. Theo’s heart sank as Shihazar, the prophetess, Father’s spiritual advisor, made her way across the room towards them, her thick hooded cloak a darker red than the robes the priests wore. Wonderful, he thought, watching as the fold of the cloak trailed behind her, making her look as if she was floating over the floor. Theo wondered if she practiced it in front of a mirror and decided he wouldn’t put it past her. He had never liked her; she smelt funny and he had always had the feeling that she didn’t like him. He should have realised she was behind this. “It is the will of God,” she said in her raspy voice. “The Spirit of Victory requires our devotion before he will aid us to defend ourselves against our enemies.”
“Why do we need to travel all the way to Paristia to show our devotion?” asked Kaspar. He looked around expectantly at his family and Shihazar, and Theo almost envied him his innocence. Kaspar always said what he thought and asked what he wanted. He was almost as tall as Theo now and promised to be taller, but his smooth open face under his glossy dark hair still betrayed his youth. Theo looked more like his father – the image of him in looks and character, people said, broader in the chest than his brothers and with the same softly curling dark hair as the king’s. Theo had questions and opinions, more, he suspected, than Kaspar did, but he had learnt not to speak out too quickly. He had learnt to look for answers himself.
If Kaspar was expecting a straight answer now, Theo doubted he would get one. Father was a good king – except for the recent trouble on the border, for the more than twenty years of his rule Kalathan had thrived. He was respected, if not always liked, and even his family were a little in awe of him, of the weight of the divine right he carried. But lately, when it came to religious matters, Theo felt that Father wasn’t as wise as he could be. He listened to crazy old Shihazar too much, that was certain.
“It’s because the shrine is there,” said Jandrin, one of the twins, leaning back on the long couch where he and Jameth had stretched out, all long arms and legs, when Father had finished explaining what he wanted them to do. They were both in green silk today, dressed alike as they often were. Dandies, thought Theo, noticing their pointed boots, the mother-of-pearl buttons on their thigh-length tunics, their long golden hair touching the embroidery on the high collars. “The spirit lives there, doesn’t it?”
“It is there,” said Shihazar, her gravelly voice rising in a crescendo and making Theo cringe, “that the Spirit is most accepting of our devotion and sacrifice!” She turned to the King and bowed low, the charms on her cape almost touching the carpet, then rose, her hands clasped before her. “To send all your sons to the shrine will be an act of devotion far exceeding anything you have done before, my lord.”
The king did not look at Shihazar. He stared out, over his sons’ heads, towards the courtyard. “Yes,” he said, quietly. “I have in the past shown my devotion in many ways. But never like this.”
“All of us? Am I going too, Mother?” Maikal tugged on his mother’s sleeve and she looked down at him, her hand stroking his fair head.
“You are,” she said, as if she hated to say it. “If your father has his way, you are all going.”
“When?” Bendegarth was excited, as Theo knew he would be. He was only twelve, barely out of the nursery, and had never been anywhere outside Kalathan City. “When do we leave? Can I watch the sacrifice? What will it be – a lamb? A bull?”
“So many questions!” said Father, affectionately, placing his hand on Ben’s shoulder. “You will leave as soon as we can make the preparations. And as for the sacrifice, I will be sending a priest with you to take care of it.” The king looked over at his wife as he spoke, and Theo saw his mother meet his eyes, then look away again, her face expressionless. She’s not happy about this either, he thought. No wonder, if all six of her sons, even Ben and Maikal, were going. But Father was her king too. No one, not even Mother, questioned his will, even about something like this.
The king held Theo back as Mother and his brothers left the room, Maikal and Ben whispering excitedly, looking forward to the horses, the tents, the campfires, the adventure of the journey. But the king was serious. "Theo," he said, facing his son and placing his hands firmly on his shoulders. "Kalathan needs this. We are in more trouble than you know. I am counting on you."
Theo was confused. "More trouble? What do you mean, Father – on the border?"
The king sighed, releasing Theo and turning away, rubbing his forehead under the crown again. "Yes, on the border. But it is more than that, more than I need to explain now. It is the same old story, that our neighbours are not happy to leave Kalathan in peace as we demand. I am counting on you to make sure this pilgrimage is successful. We need God's favour, Theo. We need it desperately."
"I will ... make sure it is successful," said Theo, looking over to where Shihazar still stood, her face half-hidden by her hood. If it was so important to please the Spirit, why wasn't she going herself? As he followed his father out of the room, he looked back at her. There was a smile on her sour old face, he was sure of it. She realised he was looking at her and changed her expression, bowing low again in what he was sure was nothing but mock respect. He was glad she wasn't going on this journey. He didn't trust the old witch at all. And he wondered, for the thousandth time, why his father didn't feel the same way.

Chapter 3
The water smelled beautiful, of jasmine and roses. It was warm – perfectly, beautifully warm, and Trina closed her eyes, her arms floating at her sides. She was clean; for the first time in months she was clean and it felt so wonderful that she ignored her very, very strong suspicion that it was all a mistake, that the soldier had never meant to fetch her to the palace, to this bedroom hung with velvet curtains and rich tapestries, to this steaming, magical, fragrant bath that was dissolving her fear and her shame in its luxury.
It had been three months. She had asked Sabine, the stout, bustling woman who had taken her from the soldier, what the day was. She had been in prison for three months, without a trial, a visit, nothing. It hadn’t been especially surprising when she had been arrested. People like her expected injustice and accusations, persecution and random, unexplained imprisonments. It had always been part of her life, from the moment the red-robed, bald-headed greasy-faced priest had seen her innocently eating dried figs out of the bag her father had just bought at the market. “The Devil’s claw!” he had cried out, pointing a shaking finger at her left hand raised half way to her mouth. Her poor father, who had trained her so carefully ever since she was old enough to understand, never to use her left hand for anything, anything at all, had to watch her being dragged away, screaming and crying, to the Temple and then to the prison at the castle. He was allowed to take her home three days later, and he had always said he hardly recognised the pale, limp, nearly frozen child they brought out from the dark cell, her secret discovered, her left wrist marked for life, her future now at stake. She was nine years old then, but she remembered it all. She remembered the fear, she remembered the hideous cleansing ceremony at the Temple, pigeon blood dripping from her head onto her dress. She remembered the cold cell, the needle and the pain in her wrist as they marked her. She remembered lying in the dark and wondering if she had died.
But that had all been ten years ago. She had stayed in the background since then, not going to school, staying at home with her parents mostly, ignoring the suspicious gazes of the people who knew what she was, learning what she could from the books her father and his friends could find for her. If she went out to the market, or to the woods with her mother to find herbs for medicines, she wore long sleeves to hide the mark. She tried, and she tried hard because she knew her future depended on it, but she was never able to do much with her right hand. She could not write, she could not sew, she could not cut up vegetables and herbs. Stir a pot; that was about all she could manage. Her father had learned to use his right hand, even to write, and no one but his family had ever known about his curse. He still used his left hand as he fashioned stools and tables and shelves out of wood, as he carved designs into his creations, all in private. In public, no one would ever have known he was a devilclaw. But Trina was different. Her right hand was stupid, useless at anything that might help her earn a living.
She did not try to hide it as she dressed. She noticed the servant girls staring at the way she buttoned the soft tunic they gave her, as she took the comb from them and worked it through her knotted, tangled hair. “Yes,” she said, shrugging at them as she tugged the pretty comb through the snarls. Was it ivory? She thought it might be; it was carved with elephants. “The Devil’s claw. But don’t worry, I don’t bite.” One of them suppressed a squeak, and she smiled to herself. It was strangely enjoyable, not to be bothering to hide it.
There was a mirror, in the room, a tall one framed in silver that showed her whole body at once. She stood in front of it and regarded herself, her whole self, for the first time in her life. The girl in the mirror was combing her hair with her right hand, she thought, wanting to laugh at the irony. She had dark circles under her eyes, but she was clean, shiny and scrubbed pink. Her hair was a nondescript brown, her face not particularly interesting, her nose perhaps a little too long, her dark grey eyes perhaps a little too large. Her arms were skinny and marked with raw red patches from sleeping in that cold, dirty cell for three months. No one had told her anything yet. She hadn’t been released. Sabine dismissed her questions and said very little else, and the other servants who brought food and bathwater and helped her to scrub off the months of dirt said nothing at all. She had given up asking when she realised she wasn’t getting any answers out of them.
Besides, right now Trina didn’t really want answers. She was locked in the room now, alone, but she was in the palace, in a pretty dress, and there was a fire burning in the grate. Her belly was full and her body was warm, and even if this was a huge mistake, which she was almost completely certain it was, there was just a chance she might actually see the princes.
It had been so long since she had been able to be in the crowd lining the road from the palace to the Temple, since she had stood with the other citizens of Kalathan and watched the King and the royal family ride by on their way to worship. The king himself, broad and strong, his dark hair curling over the white fur collar of his cape, in his heavy gold crown over the red turban, the black kulal around his eyes – he was like a picture of a king in a storybook. Then there was the fair-haired queen, Nuria, always so sad and regal on her white horse, and behind her the princes. All six of the beautiful princes, living proof of God’s favour on the king, riding behind their parents: from Theoland, the oldest, already a man and taller than his father, down to Maikal who was only Rilla’s age. While she was here, until this misunderstanding was found out and rectified, she might just catch a glimpse of one of them across a courtyard or a ballroom or whatever other kinds of fancy rooms they had in a palace. Even if she was going to be thrown back onto the street or back into the prison, she might actually see them. It was worth a wait, she thought, taking a plump, juicy grape from the bowl on the table beside the bed, and falling backwards onto the spotlessly white, impossibly soft feather pillows.

Chapter 4
There wasn’t much light in the archives; the old man who took care of the scrolls said the light damaged the old documents so he kept the place in near-darkness. Theo had to strain his eyes to read in the light of the dim lamp, but he was excited to have found this, excited as always to be putting together pieces in the puzzle of Kalathan’s history. He had never been satisfied with the too-perfect stories the tutors had told them, or with the books he and his brothers had studied about how their nation had come to be. For the last few years this had been his secret hobby, this pursuit of the truth, this chasing of the real story of the land that he was to inherit one day.
It had all sounded a little contrived to Theo, a little too good to be true; the story of the birth of Kalathan. Children were taught that the friendly blonde giants from the west had ridden over the mountains into this land, offering unity and security, and that after some insignificant skirmishes the local people had welcomed them, submitting gratefully to their rule as well as their religion. Since then the blood and the language of the conquerors and the conquered had mingled so extensively that no one, not even the kings, could be very sure whose side they should take if it were ever necessary. It made sense, he supposed, to imagine it to be a happy event – that the army had brought their swords along just for show, that the local people willingly shared their land, their food, their homes and their wealth with their invaders. It was simpler to believe that the two peoples shared their culture in some kind of collaboration, and that it was friendship and co-operation, not coercion and violence that had led to the syncretism of cultures, the mix of west and east, of fair and dark, that was Kalathan.
But Theo had never liked assumptions. Simplicity was all very well but it wasn’t truth, and Theo had always, since childhood, thirsted to know the truth of things. His mother still teased him, telling stories about his constant questions as a child, how he had begun reading when he was four and had never stopped, how he had begged to stay in the schoolroom when Jandrin and Jameth had begged just as earnestly to be allowed to leave.
Since he had finished with tutors and was the master of his own time, he had spent many spare hours in dim rooms like this one, trawling through old documents. He felt just as strongly about learning archery and swordsmanship, and about his duty to stay as strong and fit as any soldier in the army, but he enjoyed the discipline of studying more than his daily training. He had found histories written on cracked, dry parchments, forgotten evidence of orders and decrees, military records, letters and old laws. He had filled piles of notebooks, and often at night he would lie awake, feeling as if he was slowly learning to know his country as it had been, as it had grown and become what it was today.
But it was the faith of Kalathan, especially, that had fascinated him recently. In the past months he had learnt things that he doubted anyone else living knew about the history of the holy Kalathan Temple and the Temple scriptures, things that made him glad his father seldom asked him about his hobby, as everyone called it. Theo was piecing together bits of the past, and if Father were to ask him about it he might have to admit it: his discoveries did not always fit with what he had been taught.
This one he found the other day was gold – a letter from the same year as the conquest of Kalathan, the ink still readable and the parchment only barely crumbling. It was from a general of one of the armies of Albrin the Conqueror himself, a letter to someone that Theo, after all his research, recognised to be one of Albrin’s advisors. Theo made his way slowly through the letter, copying each word into his notebook as he translated from the Old Tongue into modern Kalath. At first it read much as he had expected, greetings and some other military details, until a few paragraphs in when he stopped, put down his pen and read on without writing it down. The general had been sent with his army to the lands to the north, to inform the local people of their new status as subjects of the new king of Kalathan. Theo’s brow furrowed as he read, as he pictured the soldiers scaring the locals with their weapons and armour, taking inventories of the wealth of each village, of the number of fighting men. He had been told, this general, to pay close attention to the religion of the people. Albrin wanted to know about their worship. He wanted to know about the gods they served and feared, and the general wrote back faithfully, describing rituals and shrines and practices in detail.
Theo reached the end of the scroll and sat back. Albrin, he had been taught, had brought the true religion of the Temple with him from the west, from where he and his followers had broken away from the Empire that had taken over most of the continent. They had made their way over the mountains to this land, where they had been met by the scattered Kalath tribes, who had found in Albrin and his army the leadership they had lacked. Albrin’s army had brought unity and peace to Kalathan, and they had built the first Temple, the stone foundations of which still lay under the walls of the current Temple in the city. Parts of the Scriptures had been brought from the west, and the final revelation had come from God, miraculously, to a humble priest who had accompanied the conquerors. It was through these final Scriptures that Kalathan’s status as God’s holy nation had been revealed. The Western Empire, he had learnt as a boy, did not serve the true God, the God of power and victory, the creator of the universe, the God who had chosen Kalathan as his own special land. Those in the Empire worshipped a weak God who had walked on earth as a man and even died, hung on a stake like a criminal. Theo had never understood this and had grown up believing all people in the Empire to be ridiculously stupid. How absurd to worship a weak God who took the form of a man! In Kalathan they held up and revered the sword, and they forged ahead in strength with the blessings of the Spirits of Victory and Plenty.
But this scroll was telling a different story. Theo’s brow furrowed as he read. The general described a ceremony marking a young boy as an evil omen because he used his left hand rather than his right. He peered at the text, trying to figure out the word that was used – a demon hand, perhaps? No, not a hand – a claw, a talon, like an eagle’s. The boy was marked on his wrist, blue pigment rubbed into a cut to scar him permanently. The people believed he was bad luck, said the general, and he would be an outcast, worthy only for the lowest of tasks. Just like the devilclaws we have today, thought Theo, cursed by God for some sin of their parents.
Theo thought of the city’s devilclaws, often homeless on the streets, rejected by their families, worth less than the lowest servants. They were sullen people, he knew, suspicious and dishonest. The strange inversion that caused them to prefer their left hands affected their characters, too, and it was common knowledge that you could never trust a devilclaw. The prisons were full of them. It was a problem, one that worried his father terribly. An abundance of devilclaws meant a lack of blessing. They were evidence of God’s displeasure with his people. Mother took pity on them and had opened a shelter down near the harbour, but Father disapproved, even of that. But now – this document seemed to be saying that this belief, taught in the Temple, was something taken from the original tribes of Kalathan.
But it couldn’t be right. Theo had always been taught that the pagan tribes had abandoned their own religions to follow the Temple faith. He read it again, remembering the tutor who had been found out while he was employed at the palace, one of the best and nicest he and his brothers had ever had. He remembered the man being dragged away in disgrace. He remembered his mother comforting him, saying little, only that Father wanted him gone. He had accepted it then, child as he was, but now an awful possibility was creeping into his mind. What if this belief about devilclaws was nothing but a remnant of ancient paganism that had crept into the Temple worship? What if all the thousands of people in Kalathan vilified for their left-handedness were not cursed at all? It was in the Scriptures: “Cursed is he who lifts the devil’s hand, who dares to bring the darkness into the holy shrine.” 
There wasn’t much else in that letter that was interesting, and Theo made a few notes before getting up to put it back. He picked up the next one, and this time he recognised something else, something he could hardly believe. He shook his head as he read, his mind labouring over the tediously formal Old Tongue. Devilclaws were one thing, but this? He rolled up the scroll again and stared at it in his hand. It was as genuine as anything else in here, an original document, over five hundred years old. He returned the scroll to the shelf and picked up his notes. He needed to talk to someone about this.
He was in luck – Mother was in one of her rooms, working on embroidery in a circle of other women. When he appeared at the door, she sent them away, and he stood at her window, looking out over the courtyard as she put away her threads.
“You are dusty,” she said, coming over to him, affectionately brushing off his shoulder.
“I’ve been in the archives,” Theo said, smiling at her. She was still lovely; even though she was his mother he could appreciate that. Her golden hair was still thick and long, braided today in a complex crown around her head. “I found some things that confused me.”
“And you thought I could help you?” She smiled, settling down in the chair she had been sitting in. “It’s been a while since I studied any history.”
Theo sat down opposite her, leaning forward. “I found some old letters from the time of the Conquest,” he said. “One of them spoke about the old tribes of Kalathan worshipping a sword. They placed it in the middle of a circle and cut their hands with it, just as we do.”
“That is odd. A coincidence? Perhaps they picked up the practice from the conquerors?”
Theo shook his head. “No, the dates don’t match up. They had never met the conquerors until then. It was clearly part of their own religion, and the general who wrote the letter described it as such. And there are other examples. Mother – I have this strange feeling that there are parts of the Temple beliefs that come from the tribal religions of the old Kalathan.”
Nuria laughed, lightly. “No, Theo. That can’t be right. Albrin and the conquerors brought the Temple worship from the West, and the final revelation came from God himself in the year of the Conquest. Everyone knows that.”
“They brought something from the West,” said Theo. “I just wonder what exactly that was. I know it sounds blasphemous, Mother, but I wonder if it was added to by men, not by God.”
“That can’t be right, Theo,” said Nuria. “God gave us the Scriptures, as they are. We can trust them.”
Theo leaned back in his chair. “I believe that, Mother. Or at least I think I do – I must. One day I will be the head of the Temple. But the evidence seems to be telling me something else.”
“Did you find anything about … about devilclaws?” Mother looked away as she asked. “You know that is one thing I have always wondered about.”
“I did, Mother,” he said. “The old tribes also persecuted people who used their left hands. I found an example today.”
“They did?” She looked back at him. She seemed excited. “You know I have never believed they are cursed.”
“If it’s a pagan belief, then why is it in the Temple Scriptures?” Theo asked. “I don’t understand.”
“Perhaps there is another explanation for what you found,” said Mother. “You could speak to Shihazar. Or Amrak.”
“Shihazar?” Theo shook his head. “I don’t want to ask her. She deals in dreams and superstitions, not facts. I don’t know why Father puts up with her. And Amrak is so old and deaf these days. I can’t ask him either.”
Theo leant back in his chair and looked over at his mother, who had a faraway look on her face.
“Why don’t you believe devilclaws are cursed, Mother?” he asked. “You are so devoted to the Temple in every other way.”
“It’s not easy to explain,” she said. 
“Tell me,” said Theo, leaning forward eagerly.
“Oh no, Theo,” she said, smiling. “There’s nothing to tell, really. But I did hear once, from a friend I had before I married your Father, that there are people in Kalathan who reject the Temple and the Scriptures. There are people who say it is false and who travel around Kalathan preaching that. My friend had listened to one of them, in an inn.”
“Tell me more,” said Theo. “I have never heard of anything like that. How would anyone dare to say such things in public?” To question the Temple and the Scriptures was to question the authority of the king. And that was treason.
“I don’t remember much more,” said Nuria. “I only remember that he said he had listened to this man, who was a foreigner, from the west. From Ahrania.”
“A foreigner, of course,” said Theo, feeling a little comforted. Surely no true and loyal citizen of Kalathan would ever do such a thing. He was confused, yes, about details, but it would be absurd to think that it was all a deception. It would make his life, his entire destiny into something meaningless, something founded on a lie. A gong sounded from beneath them, summoning them to dinner.
“Come on,” said Nuria, reaching over to him and putting her hand affectionately on his knee. “Time to go. And I am proud of you, Theo, of the way you search for knowledge. A man who has knowledge is a man on his way to wisdom.”
“So far today, knowledge is only confusing me,” grinned Theo, as he followed his mother down the staircase. “I don’t feel wise at all.”

Chapter 5
She wasn’t the only girl who had been brought to the palace from the prison. There was another one, a girl so small Trina had been surprised to learn she was eighteen, only a year younger than herself. She was dark-skinned, her eyes black, almond-shaped and fearful. She was from the north, she told Trina in her heavily accented Kalath after she had been brought in, washed and dressed as Trina had been, and then locked in the room with her. And she was a devilclaw too, as awkward and useless with her right hand as Trina was. Her family had pleaded with her to leave their village when she had been found out, and she had travelled to the city with a trader. She had found work and a bed sweeping and cleaning in the market for a cloth merchant, but then her sleeve had slipped. The stall owner didn’t want bad luck to ruin her business, and Uka had spent the next days and nights in the streets until she had been arrested at last, hunger driving her to theft. The mark on her arm was newer than Trina’s, her shame more raw.
“Do you think we are leaving now?” she whispered to Trina, as Sabine told them to take their hooded jackets and the bundles waiting beside the door and follow her. It was dawn, the light just beginning to turn golden.
“What do you think?” asked Trina, annoyed at the stupidity of the question. Of course they were leaving. The girls were dressed to travel, in fur-lined boots and sensible brown dresses, of far better quality than anything Trina had ever owned herself, and the bundles looked as if they held spare clothes. She felt sorry for Uka, for the traumatic months she had lived since her left-handedness had been discovered, but she was uneducated and so nervous that Trina didn’t particularly enjoy her company. They had been told by the woman that they were going to be servants on a journey, on a pilgrimage to Paristia. “We are servants?” Trina had asked, not understanding. She didn’t much like the sound of that, but it was better than being thrown back into prison.
“Yes,” said Sabine. “Servants for the journey. You will serve the pilgrims.”
“Who are the pilgrims?” 
The woman shook her head. “You will find out when you leave.”
“Wouldn’t they rather have men? For a journey?” A scary suspicion was growing in Trina’s mind. She knew how to make a campfire and cook food over it, she had been a servant, but perhaps that was not the kind of servant they were expected to be. Why take two women, two omens of bad luck, on a pilgrimage? In the two years she had been taking care of herself, scraping a living doing the work no one else wanted to do, often going hungry and sleeping in the cold, she had managed to protect herself from men who thought her curse meant she was not worthy of their respect. She had learnt to keep away from men as much as she could and had once had to bite and kick her way out of a bad situation in a cheap boarding house. She was not willing to sink that low now, even if it meant she would never be hungry and cold and scared again. She had her pride, if not her freedom.
“Servants,” said Sabine, firmly. “That is all.” She met Trina’s eyes, and Trina thought she saw compassion there. She decided to believe her, and to put her suspicions aside.  Uka was trembling; but Trina doubted that the thought had crossed her mind.
“And after this journey? Will we go back to prison?”
“I don’t know,” said Sabine, and Trina felt that she was telling the truth. Then she looked around before lowering her voice to speak to them. “And take these. Keep them with you.” She handed them each a small knife. 
“What for?” Uka held hers as if it might bite her.
“Just … in case. From me, hear. Don’t mention it to anyone.”
Trina took the knife and put it in the inside pocket of her jacket. Sabine had been terse and brief with them over the past days, but she had taken care of them and Trina had learnt to be glad for any kindness, whatever form it took. If they were going to be traveling with a group of men she might be glad of the knife.
So they were going on a journey. If Sabine was right and they were going along to work, it was nothing to complain about. They had warm clothes, there was likely to be decent food – Trina knew she was still a prisoner, but it was better than a cell, and she allowed herself to feel a little hope alongside her uncertainty.
Carrying their bundles, the girls followed Sabine along passages and down stairs. Trina’s eyes darted everywhere, still hoping for a glimpse of the princes. The golden-haired twins in their colourful clothes had always been her favourite, and then perhaps Kaspar who was only a little younger than she was. He was getting as handsome as his brothers, and unlike grumpy Theo he always had a smile for the crowds. She wasn’t especially fond of Theo; his broad, open face and thick, dark hair were too much like his father’s for her taste, and he was never cheerful as his brothers were. Theo and the queen were the sullen ones, the ones who looked as if they would rather be anywhere else than on the road to the Temple, that they would rather be doing anything else than waving and smiling at the ordinary people who had flocked to see them. The other two were just children, Ben already the image of his father and eldest brother, and Maikal as fair and pretty as his mother.
But in the four days since she had been brought to the palace, three since Uka had arrived, this was the first time she was even leaving the bedroom. She had stared out of the window for hours, searching all the time, but the room was three storeys up and faced a back yard. The only young men she had seen were trussed-up servants and weedy stable boys. Not a prince in sight. It was disappointing. Now they were leaving on this journey, and she would lose her chance.
They were led outside, across a green courtyard, out the other side towards what looked to Trina like stables. There was a group of people and horses outside.
“You are not to speak to them,” said the woman, as they walked. “Pralin will tell you what to do.”
Trina did not ask what she meant, or who Pralin was, because she had seen someone in the group gathered around the horses, a face buried deep in her memories. He was older, ten years older, his head still shiny-bald, his gut still straining the red fabric of his robe. He was sitting on a pile of luggage, drinking from a leather flask he held in his fat hand, shouting for someone to move, to hurry up with his horse. She felt the bile rise in her throat, as the memory of terror and disbelief washed over her. She was looking at the priest who had caught her, who had dragged her away from her father that day, the priest who had shoved her through the doors of the Temple for the ritual that had left her dripping with pigeon blood and shivering with disgust. Was he the pilgrim, this priest? Could she bear it, if he was? Perhaps it would be better to refuse, to take her chances back in that cell in the prison.
And then she looked around, still reeling from the shock, at the other people gathered around the horses, her stomach hollow at the thought of having to serve this man, at the thought of travelling with him. She turned her face away towards the horses, clutching her stomach against the nausea she felt. Standing just a few feet away from her was a young man, his dark hair glinting a little in the weak morning sunlight. He was fastening a bow to the side of a horse – no, two bows, and he was carefully wrapping them in cloth as if he was concerned that the journey should not hurt them. He turned at the priest’s shout, only glancing at Trina briefly before focussing his attention on his saddle again. He had no silk turban or gold crown today, no cape lined with white fur. His eyes were not even blackened with kulal as they were at the parades, but Trina knew him immediately. And the others were there too, she realised – Jandrin and Jameth, their golden hair standing out against the drab brown of their travelling clothes; Kaspar, older now than she remembered, stroking the nose of his horse. Ben and Maikal, standing with a slight older man who was fastening their capes around them.
So these were the pilgrims. She looked back at the priest, who was eating now, shoving a heel of bread into his mouth and washing it down with more of whatever was in his flask. She was a servant to the princes of Kalathan! This could be the miracle she had been hoping for, it could be a gateway to a new life, a new chance to be something more than a fugitive. If she served them well, if she behaved herself and kept her tongue, maybe, even though she was a devilclaw … there were so many possibilities. As she was helped up onto a pony with Uka, she marvelled at her luck. Even if she had to spend a few days serving the odious priest, it would be worth it. If you could see me now, Father, she thought, happily, as the procession began to move forward, you would be so proud.

Chapter 6
Every morning began with the sword ceremony, with the brothers, Pralin the groom, the priest, and the two guards standing in a circle around a sword in the ground. Theo and his brothers recited the words that they all, even Maikal, knew by heart, words in the Old Tongue, the language the conquerors had brought from the West, the language of all the Temple worship and prayers. Theo suspected only he and perhaps the priest understood what was said. The twins and Kaspar had learned it, of course, and Ben was struggling through it now, but he knew his brothers had never mastered the complex, formal language that had come so much more easily to him. He had thought to get it over with and had volunteered to go first to be the one to draw the sword across his hand for the blood offering. He had been tempted, the first morning, to pull his rank and cancel the whole thing, but he decided that the pompous priest wasn’t worth antagonising. It was the fourth evening already and the cut on his hand still smarted. He sat by the campfire and held it out towards the flames, hoping the warmth would soothe the sting. The thick gold seal ring on the last finger of his right hand warmed up quickly, and he twisted it around, absent-mindedly.
The twins were singing again on the other side of the huge campfire, a jolly song about a travelling tinker that had the fat old priest roaring with laughter and slapping his knee. The cuts on their hands didn’t stop them from playing. Ben was listening, his eyes wide, and Maikal was fast asleep. The journey was hard on the little boy – it was hard enough for Theo to ride all day, and he had done it before, many times. Theo knew that Maikal missed Mother, although he insisted his tears were because of the way his back and legs hurt from riding all day.
“Not much longer, Maikal,” Theo had said, crouching down beside the boy’s bed in one of the tents that evening. “We’re almost there.”
“I know. Tomorrow we will reach the shrine, we’ll pray there, and then we will go home and see Mother,” he said, sleepily.
“See you in the morning, Mouse,” said Theo quietly, making sure the blankets and furs were tucked snugly around him. Maikal smiled a little as his eyes closed. Maikal slowed things down, Theo had thought as he had stepped out of the tent. But he was enjoying having him along.
Kaspar came over to him and sat down, also holding out his hands towards the dancing flames. He nodded towards the twins and the priest. “They’re enjoying themselves,” he said.
Theo nodded. “Perhaps a little too much.”
Kaspar smiled, pulling his jacket tightly around him. “It’s cold, isn’t it?”
Theo shrugged. “Warm enough in the tent with all of you.”
Kaspar looked over to where the two girls huddled around the much smaller fire they had made after they had cooked and served the meal to everyone else. “Those girls,” he said. “Why do you think they are travelling with us?”
“I did wonder,” said Theo. “Last time we had boys. But I’m not complaining. The food is better than it was last time, when Pralin made it.”
“It’s the taller one who makes it,” said Kaspar. “Did you know they were both in prison?”
Theo hadn’t known. He had assumed that whoever had been tasked with organising this trip had just decided to send some female servants along this time, maybe for Ben and Maikal’s sake. Beyond that he hadn’t given it any thought. “What for? Have you spoken to them?”
“Not really,” said Kaspar. “I asked where they were from and the small one said they were brought from the prison. I tried to ask more but the other one just looked down and said she wasn’t allowed to speak to me.”
“Why on earth do we have servants who were in prison?” Theo looked around for Pralin, but the older man usually went to sleep when Maikal did.
“We could ask them,” said Kaspar. “They will talk to us if we want them to.”
Theo looked over at the girls. They were both very thin, the smaller one especially. She looked Northern, with her dark skin and small eyes. The other girl was typically Kalathene – lighter in colouring than the other girl, her long straight hair braided down her back. They don’t look as if they came from prison, he thought, although what that should look like he didn’t exactly know.
“I’m curious, Kaspar,” he said. He had never spoken much to servants before, except for Pralin when it was necessary, and never to anyone who had been in prison. Father would never speak to a servant unless he had to, and he would certainly not approve of their doing it now. But Father was not here, and he was curious.  “All right. We’ll ask them.”
He stood up and walked over to the smaller fire. As he reached them the taller girl looked up at him, and for a second, he was startled. He had expected, he supposed, the same nervous expression he usually got from servants in the palace, the same deference and caution, even fear perhaps, that he sensed from most people he met for the first time. He didn’t expect anything different; he was the heir to the throne and would be their king one day. But this girl looked at him, just for that moment, as if she was excited, as if she was pleased that he was coming over to them. There was no awe in her expression, no self-deprecation, only curiosity, just as he was feeling himself about her and the other girl. But it only lasted a moment; she seemed to remember her place, looked away quickly and stood up, pulling the other girl up with her.
He was suddenly at a loss for words. He looked down at their fire, a pitiful excuse for one compared to the one he had just left. They had gathered firewood, helped to make the big fire and prepared the food, and now shivered at this little fire while the rest of them enjoyed the warmth of the other one. “Come over,” he said, surprising himself with his own words. “You must be cold.”
Kaspar looked at him in surprise, but Theo could see he was pleased. Kaspar was always in trouble for talking to servants and being “too familiar” with people he wasn’t supposed to be interested in. But Theo was interested now, too.
“But my lord,” said the taller girl, “we are …” She paused, and he looked at her, amazed that she would consider for one moment not doing as he had said.
“I have invited you to the other fire,” he said, trying to sound stern, but feeling more curious than ever. “I did not expect an objection.”
In answer, she held out her wrist, pulling up her sleeve to show him.

Chapter 7
So, they were devilclaws. He had stood his ground, thinking of his tutor and of the ancient pagan boy from the old scroll, and repeated his invitation. He knew Kaspar wouldn’t mind. The girls obeyed, as they had to, and sat cautiously, close together, on the log beside the roaring blaze. In the firelight Theo thought perhaps he could see the prison now in their hollow cheeks. The darker girl kept her eyes down; the other one seemed less nervous. Kaspar smiled his charming smile and slowly they seemed to lose their wariness.
It did not take long for them to tell their stories, Trina speaking more than the tiny Uka, who said little, holding her tiny hands out to the flames, her fingers blue with cold. It bothered his conscience, those blue hands. Both girls had warm jackets and boots but no gloves. He found himself thinking that Maikal’s nurse had packed a spare pair for him, that they would fit her. Servants in the palace were always well looked-after. But these girls had only been at the palace a few days. They were thin, and cold, and it sat uncomfortably with him. This was the fourth day and he hadn’t given them a thought other than to be glad for the decent cooking.
Uka was quiet but Trina talked; after she was sure they wanted her to, she answered every question he and Kaspar had. She told them about being discovered, imprisoned and marked, very cautiously at first but more boldly when she realised that they were listening with interest and did not seem concerned to put her in her place. She told them about choosing to let her family leave the city without her after her father’s death, to save them from the shame of what she was, about living on her own in the years since then, and finally about her foolish decision to take advantage of the warmth of the temple loft one freezing night just a few months ago.
Theo was surprised. He was surprised at her story, surprised that she sounded as if she was educated, surprised that his father or whoever it was had sent these two sorry souls along on the pilgrimage to cook and sweep away pine needles, when Pralin and the guards would have managed just as well on their own. But most of all he was surprised at himself, having a conversation with a female servant who had been in prison, surprised to find himself wanting to hear what she had to say.
“I don’t understand,” he said, not for the first time.
“I don’t either,” said Trina, and again he found himself meeting her eyes. It was strange – although there were girls at the palace, they never spoke to him much, not candidly like this. Had he ever had a proper conversation with a girl before, even with someone close to his rank? There were always girls at the palace, scattered about, perched on benches or walking quietly in the gardens, keeping themselves busy with books and bits of sewing. When he and his brothers were ready to choose a wife there was a selection, there for the taking like cakes in a baker’s shop. There were parties, in the evenings, when the music played and the tables overflowed with sweet things, when his brothers and their friends took advantage of moonlight and candlelight and disappeared into corners with whomever had caught their interest. He had done so himself, a few times, but there had never been much talking involved. Lately, he had avoided these evenings, frustrated with the girls who looked at him as if he were some kind of god, either, it seemed, thrilled or terrified at having caught the interest of the heir to the throne. What girl, he had thought, could ignore the fact that he needed to find a wife, and that the woman he chose would one day be Queen of Kalathan, a mother of kings?
But now here was this girl, this servant, who looked him in the eye, who noticed what happened around her and questioned what she saw. It was disconcerting, and he wondered for the first time if he was as connected to the people of Kalathan as he thought he was.
“Forgive me,” said Trina, looking down. She must have sensed the impropriety of the glance they had exchanged. “Perhaps I should not be speaking like this.”
“It’s all right,” said Theo. “When we get back to the palace, I will find out why you were made to come on this journey, and I will make sure that you do not return to the prison.” It was the least he could offer. And besides, he wanted to know the reason himself.
“Oh, thank you, my lord!” said Uka, her eyes brimming with tears. But Trina did not thank him. She smiled, though, before she turned away to look back into the flames. It’s not enough, he thought suddenly. Even if they were not imprisoned again, they had nowhere to go.
“May I ask a question?” asked Trina.
“You may,” he said, thinking that she had forgotten, again, to call him lord.
“Do you believe we are cursed? Uka and I, and others like us?”
Theo felt his heart sink in his chest. No one but Mother knew that he suspected strongly that they were not. He looked at Kaspar, then back at her. “I know what the Scriptures say. The king believes you are.”
“I’ve never met a devilclaw before,” said Kaspar. “I didn’t expect one to be like you. Or Uka,” he said, nodding to the silent girl who still held her hands out to the warmth.
“You probably have met others.” Trina’s face was earnest. “People hide it. Parents train their children not to use their left hands.”
“Really?” Kaspar had been too young to remember the tutor, Theo thought. But he remembered. He had been wise, and kind.
“My father hid it all his life,” said Trina. “Until he died.”
“How did he die?” asked Kaspar.
“He was killed on the border with the Empire, at the Kirgiz pass,” said Trina. “Two years ago.”
“I am sorry to hear that,” said Theo.
“So was I,” said Trina. “But he hid it. He was a good man. He was a loyal subject. Not bad luck.”
“Perhaps,” said Theo, “for now I can say this – I don’t think it’s right, the way you have been treated. It’s not right that you have had to live the way you have.”
“You should do some research on it, Theo,” said Kaspar. He turned to the girls. “Theo likes to find things out. The libraries, the archives – he’s always holed up with old books and scrolls somewhere.”
“I will,” said Theo, feeling like a fraud. But this was not the time to talk about what he had been discovering.
“Thank you,” said Trina, and again she looked him straight in the eye, a smile on her lips. “Thank you, my lord.”
Theo lay awake that night, listening to his brothers’ snores, to the guard’s footsteps outside, to the hooting of owls and the rustling of the trees. Why did being left-handed mean you were cursed? Did it really mean they brought bad luck? Trina’s father had given his life for Kalathan despite what he was. His tutor had been a good man too, a wonderful teacher, an expert on his country’s history. And if it was true, if the belief had a foundation, then why were a pair of cursed girls on this trip with them? It was wrong, the way the girls had been treated, as if they were slaves. It was unjust. He had never in his life considered for a moment that his father, aided as he was by God, could be unjust. He had assumed that the criminals in the prisons were there for good reasons, that the laws of Kalathan were sound. He had doubted some of the practices of the Temple, yes, he had begun to doubt that it was what it claimed to be. But he had never doubted his father’s judgement. Not until now, until Trina had looked him in the eyes and asked him, shamelessly, what he thought. All the things he had been learning in the libraries and archives spun around in his mind. The cut on his hand was stinging again, and when he finally fell asleep in the early hours of the morning, he dreamt of temples and prisons, of curses and shrines, of soldiers marching to their deaths, and of innocent, hungry girls with blue marks on their wrists, looking him in the eyes and asking why.

Chapter 8
They crossed over into the province of Paristia and reached the shrine on the fifth day. It was cloudy, and raining a little, and Trina was relieved to see the small stone building at the crest of the small hill, its arched doorways and curly spire marking it clearly as a Temple shrine. The fat priest had been all business that morning, actually calling for hot water to wash himself and changing his dirty robe for a clean one from his pack. He even put his flask away, riding at the head of the party with the guards. But his fake piety didn’t fool Trina. Last night Uka had crawled back into their tent when they had finally finished their work, almost hysterical after he had grabbed her arm and pulled her behind one of the men’s tents. He had tried to open her dress, and had pressed his dreadful mouth to hers, and she had only managed to run away when Kaspar had walked past so close that the priest had let her go to avoid discovery. Trina had tried to comfort the shivering girl, angry and sad for what they had both suffered.
Would it always be like this – people like her and Uka at the mercy of everyone else just because of the way they had been born? She thought of Theo, and the compassion and understanding she thought she had sensed the night before. If he was going to be the king one day, then perhaps there was hope. She had lain awake the night before, dreaming of what Kalathan might be like with a king like him. She had considered telling him about the priest and Uka, but decided it was not worth the risk of not being believed. She had a feeling he would probably believe her, but it was just a feeling, a sense she didn’t trust yet. The word of a female servant against a priest’s – her experience told her it wasn’t likely.
She had glared daggers at the back of the priest’s head as she brought him his hot water, though, and to her surprise he had looked up at her. Not to thank her, of course, but to give her a look that first angered, then puzzled her. He had been only brusque and rude with her during the journey so far; ordering her about and finding fault with everything she did. She was sure that he did not recognise her, and she had no desire to remind him. But today he had spared her a glance, and Trina had thought for a moment that she had seen pity in it. Smug, supercilious pity. She bristled inwardly as she left him the water and returned to the fire where she was still preparing breakfast. Pompous old goat, she thought, stirring the porridge and wishing she could say it to his face. Why should he feel sorry for her all of a sudden, after treating her like dirt? She didn’t want his, or anyone else’s sympathy.
He stayed sombre and serious during the sword ceremony, offering his own blood, and she watched him, thinking to herself that she had learnt something on this journey. Being a priest had nothing to do with holiness. This priest was a hypocrite, preaching piety and uprightness, yet his heart was selfish and cruel.
Uka’s nervousness and excitement was contagious as they reached the shrine and dismounted. “What will they sacrifice?” she asked, looking around her.
“I don’t know,” said Trina, as three priests appeared at the doorway and made their way down the steps to speak to Theo and the priest. “Do they have these shrines in the north?”
Uka nodded. “We sacrifice cows,” she said. “Sometimes an ox or a bull. But there are no animals here. Have you never seen a sacrifice?”
Trina shook her head. “My parents were not religious,” she said. “We attended the Temple services, but we didn’t do anything more. We never went on pilgrimages or visited shrines.” In the past that admission would have caused her to feel ashamed and exposed, but she didn’t care anymore. Father was dead and Mother was far away. The religious habits of her family seemed irrelevant now. 
“My parents had the best harvest they had ever had after a sacrifice to the Spirit of Plenty,” said Uka. “We gave up a cow, but we were blessed after that. Maybe this Spirit is different.” She looked wistfully at the shrine, as if she would have liked to go in and make a sacrifice herself.
Trina patted her horse’s nose as they waited for Pralin to tell them what to do next. She was hoping for a night under real shelter, especially if the rain was going to continue, and thinking ruefully that being here meant the journey was half over. She had enjoyed the travelling, the feeling of freedom being outside and on the road. The riding had been difficult at first, and she had hurt all over every minute of the first night. But Pralin, whose gentleness and patience reminded her so much of her father, had shown her how to sit and what to do with the reins, and she had begun to enjoy it. There was plenty of good food, and compared to the prison, sleeping in the little tent with Uka under palace quilts and furs was luxurious. She felt strong and full of energy, as if what the months in the prison had taken from her body and her spirit was slowly being restored. The end of the pilgrimage meant at best that she would have to go back to fending for herself, at worst back to a cell, and it was an oppressive thought. She still nurtured a faint hope that if she did well on this journey, perhaps she would be allowed to stay on at the palace as a servant. The conversation the night before with Theo and Kaspar had kindled that hope, and she held it close, daring to believe that her luck may be turning. If the princes could speak to her with such kindness and respect, then there was a chance that things might be looking up.
She noticed that the three or four shrine priests who had emerged from the doorway were looking at them, peering around the group of horses and men to catch a glimpse of her and Uka. They probably didn’t see many women around here, she thought. If they slept in the shrine tonight they would have to be careful. She brought her hand to her jacket pocket and felt for her knife, reassured by the weight of it under her hand. Then one of them was speaking to Theo, motioning for him and the other princes to walk around the side of the building. She watched Theo hesitate a little, then take his bow from his horse and follow with his brothers. The other priests were talking to the guards, out of earshot of the princes.
“Perhaps they are taking the princes to see the sacrificial animal,’ said Uka, excitedly. “Our shrine at home had a pen behind it. It must be a bull. Perhaps even two!” Trina shuddered at the thought and looked around her for a dry spot to wait until it was over. She wondered how long it would all take.
And then the princes were out of sight, and one of the new priests, a slight young man, was beckoning to her and Uka. “Come!” he called. “Come and shelter in the shrine!”
Trina looked at Uka. It was cold and damp out here. Maybe not all priests were like their fat one, whom she could not see right now. Perhaps these ones were kinder, if they were inviting them in out of the weather. Uka looked nervous, but she was cold too, and after handing their ponies’ reins to Pralin, who shrugged his approval, they followed the priest towards the doorway.
Inside, it was dark and warm, much warmer than Trina had expected. She could smell fire, and hear it crackling. The young priest who had called them over smiled, bowing slightly and not meeting their eyes, and led them towards another doorway that led out of the dim hall they were in. Trina held tight to Uka’s arm in hers. The young priest’s behaviour confused her. Why should he bow to them? She had never been bowed to in all her life. Surely he could see they were servants? And where were the princes? She turned to see that the two guards had come into the shrine behind them, and one closed the tall door, shutting out the weak sunlight. It was odd too, she thought, that he had closed the door, when the princes were still outside. But perhaps there was another way in.
Through the doorway was a large room, its ceiling a high dome, an enormous silver sword suspended from the middle pointing down towards the floor, and in the centre of the tiled floor, a deep pit. The fire was in the pit, radiating heat out into the room, smoke reaching upwards over the sword through the opening in the domed roof. As Trina watched, two red-faced priests were feeding it from a great pile of firewood on the side opposite her. Even in the pit, the fire roared.
On the edge of the pit was a stone altar, the height of a table. “The altar!” breathed Uka, stepping forward towards it. She put out her hand towards it, touching it reverently. “This one is much bigger than the one in the shrine near my home.” Trina shuddered at the sight of the bloodstained top of the altar, imagining animals being sacrificed on top of it. It was large enough, she supposed, for a cow or a bull. It smelled bad, a little like rotten meat, and in the heat the odour of years of spilt blood was intense.
“It’s horrible,” she whispered. “Do they never clean it?”
Uka looked horrified. “Trina! It’s the holy blood of the sacrifices! You can’t clean it!”
Trina looked away from the altar to the roaring fire. It must be fed by air from the outside, she thought, impressed at its size and heat. “Is the fire for the sacrifices?” she whispered to Uka. They still held on to each other’s arms.
Uka nodded. “First they slit the throat on the altar, then …” She motioned to the flames. “But it must be different here. Or else they will bring the animals later.”
There was another priest to Trina’s left, an older man. She glanced at him and he grinned suddenly, and even with half a mouth of yellowing teeth he looked as excited as a young boy. She turned to look at the young priest behind them. He clasped his hands together and bowed again. But before he lowered his head, she saw it – the same look of smug pity she had seen on the fat priest’s face that morning. And it hit her, a hideous suspicion, like a blow to the chest, like the lightning she had once seen strike a spire of the Temple in the city. The princes and the fat priest were the pilgrims. They should have brought the sacrifice with them. Yet there was nothing among what they had brought from the city that she could imagine could be it. They had brought no animals, nothing – except, perhaps, for two worthless, friendless girls that no one would miss.
“Uka,” she whispered, looking away from the priest and back to the fire, trying desperately not to panic. “Do they ever sacrifice … people at these shrines?”
Uka shook her head, still staring mesmerised into the flames. “Not any more. It used to happen long ago, but no one would do that today.”
“Uka,” said Trina again. She felt paralysed, numb, more terrified than she had ever been in her life. The priests were hovering around them, watching them, and her flesh prickled at the thought of what they might be thinking. “We need to get out of here. Now.” Did Theo and the princes know? She did not want to believe that they did. But the king must have planned this. And the fat priest knew. It all made sense now. He had known all along.
Uka looked up at her, confused. “I think they might let us watch the ceremony,” she whispered back, her eyes wide. “I want to see it. Why must we leave?”
“Is there another way out?” Speaking, thinking was a terrible effort. She fumbled at her pocket for her knife, leaning close to Uka so the priests would not see what she was doing. “Is there another door?”
“Sometimes, under the pit,” said Uka, beginning to sense Trina’s agitation. “But why? What is it?”
“Come,” said the young priest from behind them. His wheedling tone filled Trina with dread. He spoke as if they were little children – no, as if they were dogs, or sheep. “Come with me, to the kitchen. We have something for you there.”
Trina stood still, clutching Uka’s arm tightly, her back to him. The fire was roaring; they could not get into the pit to get out that way. The doors were shut, and the guards were there. They were trapped in the shrine; they had walked right into the trap, and perhaps this was where it ended. She would be sacrificed to the spirit of Victory, and God would reward the king’s devotion with success on the battlefield. No! she wanted to scream. It wasn’t fair! She was not ready to die, not for something like this! She would rather pick up a sword and fight for Kalathan herself than to lose her life so pointlessly. A sob rose in her throat, as she stood on the edge of the fire pit, the smell of old blood in her nostrils, her hand on her knife, listening to the footsteps of the priest behind her.
The fat priest was here too now, approaching from her left with the old one, holding something behind his back, and to her right, on Uka’s side, there was another one.
There was a noise outside, from the direction of the door. Her heart leapt – perhaps it was the princes, bringing an animal. Perhaps she was wrong after all. “Quickly,” ordered the fat priest, suddenly. “It must be done now. Those soft-hearted princes might object.”
She knew then that she had been right. The priests were about to kill them on the altar and feed their bodies to the flames. But if that was the princes at the door, if she had sensed right and if Theo and Kaspar were what they had seemed, then there was one last shred of hope for her and Uka.
“Theo!” she screamed, as loudly as she could, pulling Uka against the altar. “Help us!” She watched the fat priest as he realised what she had done, watched his face crumple into fury. He pulled the knife out from behind his back.  She kept on screaming Theo’s name, over and over again, holding on to Uka with one hand and reaching for her knife with the other one. There was nothing to do but scream, to scream, and to pull out her knife. If the fat priest thought she was going to die meekly, like the little girl she had been all those years ago, he was mistaken.
But then Uka was screaming too, and Trina felt her being wrenched away. The fat priest was distracted briefly at what was happening on Trina’s other side, and she took her chance, letting go of Uka and lunging forward, willing her small knife to lodge in his horrible heart.
But the fat priest blocked her attack, shoving her furiously to the ground. Uka was screaming, and then suddenly she was not. Trina tried to get up, but there was a boot on her chest, a large, muddy boot, and the force of it was choking her.
“Stinking devilclaw!” snarled the priest, pressing down harder on her chest. She was drowning, the light was dimming, the pain and the force beyond unbearable. But then there was a shout, and a crash. The door, she thought, the door is open! The pressure on her chest eased as the fat priest heard it too, and she lifted her arm to stab again, this time feeling every sensation of her blade sinking into the flesh of his leg. The priest screamed, and so did she, pushing up against him with all her strength. But he was strong, his strength fuelled now by pain and rage. She saw the flash of the blade as he lifted it, and closed her eyes.
The blow never came. Instead, the pressure eased again, she felt him stumble, and there was a great thud beside her. She coughed, rolling onto her side. There was someone there, holding her arm, pulling her up. Pralin, his sweet face full of concern. She took a painful breath, then two, clutching her chest, until she was sure she could get enough air. She turned around, and there was the fat priest, lying on his back, one arm dangling into the fire pit, an arrow protruding from his heart. And there was blood, all around, too much blood to be the priest’s. She knew, before she saw, that Uka was dead. Her scream had ended so suddenly. Trina climbed over the body of the priest to where the girl lay, her throat slit, her head oddly angled against the altar. Beside her lay the priest who had attacked her, the knife still in his hand, blood gurgling in his mouth, one of the twins standing over him, removing his sword from his bloody chest. Her blood still thundering in her ears, Trina gathered up the still, limp body into her arms and wiped the hair away from the pale face.
“Oh Uka,” she whispered, laying her hand over the open eyes and gently closing them. For a few days she had had a friend, a silly, nervous friend, but the first she had had in years. She lifted her eyes and found she was looking at Theo, who was crouching down a small distance away, breathing hard, his bow still in his hand. His face glowed gold in the light of the fire, his expression a mask of shock and concern. Theo, the heir to all of this. The heir to the faith that had taken her freedom and had tried now, to take her life. The Temple, the priests, the king – Uka was dead now, and her blood was on their hands.

Chapter 9
They buried the girl that afternoon, in the small graveyard behind the shrine, with the two dead priests and the guard who had panicked when he realised the princes were going to defend the girls, foolishly trying to challenge Jandrin’s sword. Theo had insisted on it, ignoring the horror in the faces of the surviving priests at the thought of a devilclaw buried at their shrine. He helped with the digging, taking his turn with the spade as if it might help to erase some of his guilt. He wondered over and over how he had missed it. He seethed with anger at his father for hiding this from him, at the priests, at Shihazar who must have been behind this, and at himself most of all for not realising. The priest has instructions, Father had said. He will take care of everything.
The sweat ran down his face even in the cool, misty rain.
“Theo,” he heard, from above him. Jandrin and Jameth, standing by the graveside. “Let one of us take a turn,” said Jan.
“I’m all right,” he said, leaning on the spade. “You stay there. Keep an eye on those priests and the guard.”
“The guard won’t be a problem,” said Jameth. “He still swears he knew nothing and was only doing what he was told. We’ve taken his weapons and he’s cleaning up the shrine now, with the priests. Pralin is watching them.”
“Good,” said Theo, getting back to work. “Is she all right? The girl?”
“She’s quiet,” said Jameth. “Resting in the priest’s house. She hasn’t cried or anything.”
“I saw her stab that priest’s leg,” said Jan. “Impressive, for a skinny girl.”
Theo thought so too. It was lucky that he had become suspicious of the behaviour of the twitchy priest who had taken them around the side of the shrine long before he had heard her scream. It was almost ridiculously lucky, too, that he had taken his bow from his horse as they had arrived. He had had his sword with him, as he and the twins always did, but a sword would not have saved Trina from the priest’s knife in time. They had been at the door when he had heard Trina screaming his name, and he had seen everything, even the other girl’s murder. Murder – that was the only word for it, and his father was responsible. The horror of it still sat in his throat, the way her scream had been cut short, the vision of her small hands clutching at her neck as she had slipped to the floor. He had killed a man today and so had each of the twins. He had trained his whole life, it seemed, for a moment such as it had been, and he had been to the border and seen combat from a distance, but it felt as if nothing could have prepared him for what it felt like, to have taken a life. That priest had wanted to kill Trina, and he would do it again if he had to, but it didn’t take anything away from the awfulness of it all. The digging helped him to forget for whole seconds at a time.
Later, he took Maikal and Ben on the short walk to the hot spring near the shrine. He had been to this shrine before; they had sacrificed pigeons, worshipped the sword and recited reams of Scripture, and he had prayed in the little chapel and felt that God must be pleased with him. This time he felt that the earth beneath his feet had somehow shifted, as if the doubts that had been born during his visits to the archives had all been leading up to this day, this dreadful day when he had realised that his father had been prepared to murder two innocent girls. For victory for Kalathan, he supposed, but still – he could not stomach it. If this was what God required in return for victory then he wanted no part of it. The implications of this conviction were massive, he knew. It was too much for today. He would think about it tomorrow, on the ride home.
Ben and Maikal were delighted with the spring, with the steaming water and the bubbles that rose from beneath the surface of the rocky pool. At least he had thought to shout to Kaspar to stay with them and had spared them the sight of what had happened. Maikal had accepted the watered-down story, the lie really, that he had told him. There had been an accident in the shrine. The sacrifice was done, and they would go home tomorrow, but Uka, the fat priest and the guard wouldn’t be coming back with them. Maikal had seemed puzzled for a moment but had not asked questions. He was disappointed to have missed the sacrifice but glad to be going home soon. But Theo knew his explanation didn’t satisfy Ben.
“I don’t think there was an accident in the shrine,” Ben said to him, as they dried off and dressed in clean clothes under the rocky overhang beside the spring. Maikal still played in the water, ducking his head under and fetching stones from the bottom. “And I want to know what happened to the girl, the small one.”
“I can tell you what happened,” said Theo, wondering how much to say. “But you won’t like it. And I don’t want Maikal to know.”
“Is she dead?” Ben was not a child any more, thought Theo. He would work it out if he wasn’t told.
“Yes. One of the priests killed her. He wanted to sacrifice her to the Spirit.”
Ben’s eyes were wide. “A person? He wanted to sacrifice a person?”
Theo nodded. He was glad that Ben was shocked.
“But you stopped him?”
“Yes. Human sacrifice isn’t part of our faith. The scriptures say that God chose Kalathan and that he treasures its people. He wouldn’t want us to sacrifice each other.” Even devilclaws? He felt a little like a fraud saying it. He just wanted to reassure his brother.
Ben didn’t ask more. They walked back in silence, to the small half-stone, half-wooden building behind the shrine where the priests slept. They would sleep there tonight. It would be cramped, but it wasn’t worth setting up camp. As he and the boys approached, Pralin came out to meet them.
“My lord,” he said. “We have water ready for your clothes.”
He looked down at the bundle in his hands, the shirt still stained with the priest’s blood which had spurted out when he had pulled out his arrow, sweaty also and streaked with earth after he had helped to dig Uka’s grave. He held it out, glad to be rid of it.
The evening passed; Trina washed clothes in a tub outside the kitchen, and Maikal and Ben helped to wring them out. Jandrin was right; she had not been crying. She had not thanked him yet, for saving her life, but he did not mind, and perhaps that was what she was doing anyway, washing his clothes. He watched her for a moment, her thin arms scrubbing at the fabric and he thought perhaps it was a little like digging the grave had been for him. She frowned at the steaming water as she worked, her sleeves rolled up, wiping her brow on her shoulder when she needed to. Pralin helped her to carry the basin to the bushes to tip out the filthy, red-brown water, and Theo found himself wishing that he had thought of it first.
But when morning came there was more. If he had felt after what had happened in the shrine that the earth was shifting under his feet, the words he read in the message that arrived from his mother were like an avalanche or a tidal wave. They had hardly dressed and Pralin was still readying the horses when the messenger rode up, exhausted after riding all night.
Panting for breath, the man reached into his jacket and pulled out an envelope. Kaspar and the twins, also standing around the new arrival, recognised it as soon as he did. The smooth, white Mandarian paper that father had given her, the dark green-tinged ink – there was no doubt that this message was from the queen.
Don’t come home, it said, in a hasty scribble, so uncharacteristic of Mother. But it was unmistakably her handwriting. There is a price on your lives. You must leave Kalathan now, without delay. Go to Ahrania. Find Dazmar, ask him to help you for my sake. Father and I pray for God’s mercy on you all.
“It’s true,” said the messenger, from where he sat now on the damp steps of the shrine, his chest still heaving. “I know what it says. I saw them, five or six of them, on the road. Hazari.”
He heard a gasp, and turned to see Trina standing near them, a heavy bundle in her arms.
“Hazari? After us?” Theo turned back to the man, struggling to take in what he was hearing.
“Please,” said the messenger, his hands shaking around the mug of water Pralin had brought him. “You must leave, now. She told me to make sure you left as soon as I reached you. They will be here, soon, and they will have no mercy!”
The brothers looked at each other. The note was genuine. This messenger they recognised from the court. But still, it was unthinkable.
“A price on our heads?” asked Kaspar. “No one in Kalathan would pay such a price – surely not?”
“Someone wants Father’s heirs gone,” said Theo. “If he has a powerful enemy it could be true.”
“What enemy?” asked Jameth. “Father has no enemies!”
“He must have, if someone wants to kill us!” said Theo, impatiently.
“Don’t get upset with me!” said Jameth. “You can’t believe it either!”
“Please,” said the messenger, starting up as if he was about to get back on his horse. “I need to go too; if I return the way I came they will know what I have done. I must go on to the town.”
“Wait,” said Theo, putting his hand on the man’s arm. “Take a fresh horse. And if you get back to the palace – please, tell the queen that we did what she said.”
He called Pralin and told him to give the man the fat priest’s horse, and a bag of food. In a minute he was gone, galloping over the hills towards the town a few miles away.
The brothers watched him go. “We have no time to waste,” said Theo. “We must do what Mother asks.”
“We could stay, and defend ourselves,” said Jameth. “We have weapons.”
“This place is too remote,” said Jandrin. “We must flee.”
“We will be slow,” said Kaspar. “Especially with the boys. How can we outrun the Hazari?”
“We must go into the forest,” said Pralin. The brothers turned to him in surprise. Their faithful groom seldom spoke at all.
“The forest?” Theo was beginning to feel panic rising; precious seconds passing in a pulse at his temple. If a wave of masked Hazaris were to descend on them now he could not imagine that they would survive.
“Yes,” said Pralin. “The country is too open here. The forest is our only chance. We could probably reach it before nightfall but there is no time to lose. We must go now.”

Chapter 10
She had first got onto a horse less than a week before, and now Trina was galloping, feeling almost all the time as if she was about to fly off her pony’s back. One moment she had been helping to pack food into saddlebags, the next she had heard that word: Hazari, and suddenly there had been panic.
She had stood, frozen, not knowing what to do. If there were Hazari coming, she had no desire to stay. As the princes grabbed what they could and made ready to leave, she had stepped back, wondering if there was anywhere she could hide, wondering how on earth she would get back to the city now if the princes were going to be disappearing off into a forest. But then Jandrin had noticed her standing there and a scowl had come over his face.
“What do we do with her now?” he asked Theo, as if she wasn’t there. “You heard everything, didn’t you?” He glared at her as if she had eavesdropped on purpose.
“Give her a horse and some money and she can leave,” said Jameth, lifting a pack onto a horse. “She rides well enough.”
“We can’t leave her here,” said Theo. “And where would she go anyway, with that mark on her arm? She’s …”
“Not our problem,” said Jandrin. “Come on, we need to go.”
“No,” said Theo, looking at Trina now. “If the Hazari get hold of her they could torture her to find out where we are headed. I think she needs to come with us.”
“Come with you?” asked Trina, her stomach turning at the word, torture. “Where? All the way to Ahrania?”
“I don’t know,” said Theo, holding up his hand to block Jandrin’s objection. “There’s no time to waste. The guard didn’t hear anything; he can stay. She’s coming with us.”
No one objected after that. There had not been time to wonder whether she wanted to go with them or not, and before ten minutes had passed, they had left, galloping away from the shrine, away from Uka’s new grave, in the opposite direction to Kalathan City. And now, they were riding up, heading into the hills through open land, following Pralin, who had suddenly become the only one who seemed to know what to do. She had felt numb and grey since what had happened in the shrine, as if she had been wading through water. But now it seemed that her life was at stake again, and this time not only hers, but the princes’ too.
Pralin led them over the hills she had seen from the shrine, down into a valley to a small stream. They stopped briefly to let the horses drink, then rode along the stream in the water. “In case there are dogs,” Pralin said, ominously. She could not stop thinking of that name: Hazari. Hired assassins. Men in black masks who would kill for a price. There were stories about their ruthlessness; myths, she hoped, that were too far-fetched to be true. They could find anyone, she had heard. There was no point even trying to run from them. They would find you, kill you, and claim their price. The thought of their trying to get something out of her, even if she was not their target, was terrifying. So she rode her pony through the water, following the princes, trusting in this small, unassuming man to be her saviour as well as theirs.
The stream grew narrower and Pralin splashed out of it, leading one of the packhorses that carried their supplies. There had been a brief argument about the packhorses in the hurry to escape: the brothers had favoured speed without supplies, but Pralin had had his way. Where they were going, he had said, they would need their supplies. So the horses ran too, and Trina was glad. She had spent nights in the open before, in the woods around the city, when she had been between jobs and without a place to stay. But this was different – it was still early spring, the nights were cold, and there were assassins after them. The three packhorses had kept up on the gallop, and she was comforted by the thought that there were tents and furs, and food in those bundles she had packed.
Theo had shouted out as they left that Kaspar should ride with her, and for the twins to take charge of each of the younger boys. So as they rode out of the stream towards the west, towards the dense shadow of the forest in the distance, Kaspar, on his tall thoroughbred, his dark hair curling in the damp air, his wide smile missing for the moment, was beside her. As the afternoon wore on and the pace slackened, the horses and the humans both losing energy, he tried to get her to talk. She wasn’t sure she wanted to – it was still absurd, to think of having a conversation with him or any of the others. But she had done it, two nights before, with Uka. Was it only such a short time ago? Once it had seemed as if she could divide her life between the time before her left-handedness had been exposed, and after. And then there was the dreadful break between the time before Father’s death, and her new life in the city on her own. It felt as if yesterday another schism had happened. After the horror of the shrine, of Uka’s death as well as the knowledge of what had almost happened to her, she felt she would never be the same person again.
“You ride well,” said Kaspar, as the group walked wearily on. There was no use expecting more of the horses; they were almost at the end of their strength, but it wasn’t far now to the edge of the forest.
“I am still on the horse,” she said, the words feeling strange in her mouth. “That is all I know.”
“Well,” he said, “some people have a knack for it. Did you ever ride before?”
“Of course not!” If he knew anything about the kind of life she had lived, he would not ask such a thing. Where did he think someone like her would have found a horse to ride? A donkey, perhaps, but even that had been a luxury her family had never enjoyed. But he didn’t realise. He couldn’t know. He had been kind enough that she decided not to hold his ignorance against him.
“It was terrible, what happened yesterday,” he said, after a while.
She nodded.
“Uka was your friend?”
“I only met her a few days ago. But yes, she was my friend. She didn’t deserve to die.” There was a lump in her throat as she spoke. She didn’t really want to talk about this.
“Theo says you fought the priest. You stabbed him.”
“Yes, but it wouldn’t have made any difference. If your brothers had not come in, he would have killed me.”
“Were you afraid?’
“Of course I was afraid!”
“Sorry.” Kaspar looked sheepish. “I just thought … sometimes it helps to talk about bad things that have happened.”
“What bad things have happened to you?” she asked, feeling suddenly irritated. “My lord,” she added, hastily.
“The Hazari are after me,” he said. “That’s something.”
She found herself smiling at the way he said it.
“I saw that,” he said. “I saw you smile. And I know you must have had a hard life. Someone like me would have no idea.”
“That’s the way it is, though,” she said. “There’s your world, and there’s mine. They have very little to do with each other.”
“Except for now. We’re all on the run.”
“I am sure you will want to be rid of me soon,” she said.
“Perhaps if we come to a town you could leave us there,” he said.
“You can’t go near a town,” said Trina. “And besides …” She stared ahead as the horses’ hooves padded against the grass, not knowing how to explain. She could see the dark mass of the forest ahead of them. There was nothing at all to see on either side of her, only a vast expanse of hills that disappeared eventually into the low cloud. Freedom – a new life – could it be possible? But she didn’t even know where she was. She was as destitute as she had ever been. To arrive in a strange town with nothing but the mark on her arm would not be a good start. “I have nothing, my lord,” she said. “If I rode away from you now, what would I do? Do you have any idea how vulnerable I would be, a woman, a devilclaw, on my own, riding a horse that clearly does not belong to me?”
“Theo would give it to you. He would give you anything you need. It would be the least we could do after … what Father did.”
“Do you think I should leave?”
“Not if you will be in danger on your own.”
“I would rather take my chances against the Hazari, my lord, than try to find my way out there, alone. I would never make it back to the city. And I can serve you.”
Kaspar was quiet for a while. “I think Theo would agree with me, Trina. You are free to choose.”
There were trees now, on either side of them, tall pines. The ground was changing, the grass thinning out. The sun had almost set. She did not answer. Kaspar’s words rang in her head. She didn’t feel as if she was free – when her only other option was to ride away alone into a strange place, it was a stretch of the imagination to call it freedom. But still – he had said it. He had meant it. Somehow, it made her feel just a little less hopeless.

Chapter 11
By the time Pralin decided they should stop, Theo wondered if he had ever been so tired in all his life. It wasn’t just the riding all day and the ridiculously small amount of sleep he had had in the past few days. His exhaustion was deeper than that. It felt as if fear and panic had seeped into his bones, as if he was carrying a load he was too weak to bear. Hazari, after them! It was unthinkable. It was terrifying. When he looked around at his brothers, the girl, Pralin – he felt the danger and the weight of his responsibility to protect them. They had to make it to safety, they had to evade these monsters. He could not, if it was in any way within his power, let anything happen to them. 
They had ridden until they could see no more, and by then they were well and truly in the forest. They had hastily pitched the big tent under the pine trees, but much to everyone’s disappointment there had been no fire. It was too risky, Pralin said, and Theo had felt ashamed of his ignorance. If it had been up to him, would he have thought of that? A fire would be visible from a distance, even in the forest, and would leave evidence. Of course, a skilled tracker would be able to see where they had camped even without a fire, but warm ashes, even buried ones, would be a dead give-away. So they had taken hunks of stale bread from the saddlebags, and handfuls of dates and apricots, and had to make do with those. Not that he had wanted to eat – it still felt as if there were rocks in his stomach. 
“It’s not safe for you to sleep alone,” he said to Trina, as Pralin and the others put up the big tent. It felt, suddenly, very important to be doing what he could to protect her, after what had happened. “You will have to sleep with us.” It was too late for the other girl, but Trina was here, very much alive. Her fate was bound up with theirs, somehow. The Temple laws on such things were strict – for young men to be sleeping in the same room with a woman would have been taboo at home, never mind all squashed together in a tent.
“Sorry, my lord,” she said. She looked tired too, as tired as all of them, but not defeated. There was spirit in her eyes, still. There was a confidence there, a determination. He thought, briefly, of the women at the palace, who had no reason to need either of those things the way she did. “I will sleep on the edge, next to Maikal.”
“There’s no reason to apologise,” he said. “I should be apologising to you.”
“No,” she said, shaking her head. “None of this is your fault.” She lifted her left hand to push back her hair where it fell over her face. Her braid had not survived the day’s riding. It was still strange, to see that left hand doing what the right should do. She held her cold dinner in her right hand, lifted it to her mouth with her left. It was so strange, to see that, and to know, for sure now, that it was not a curse.
And no, he thought afterwards, it was not his fault. It was Father’s fault that she was caught up in this, Father’s fault that she had been in prison in the first place.
After their hasty meal they unpacked some furs and covers and lay down in the tent. Jandrin had grumbled under his breath, something about devilclaws and Theo’s strangely twisted sense of duty, but he had not challenged his decision more than that. Trina had taken off her boots, undone her jacket, then turned her back and slipped off her dress. He had tried not to look but he had seen; without meaning to he had seen her lying down in the white shift she wore underneath her clothes, pulling the fur over her and an already sleeping Maikal. He had turned his back on her as he closed his eyes, surprised, again, at her resilience. All this and still no tears. He had seen exhaustion in her face, and fear, and grief, but there had been no crying.
Pralin wanted to sleep outside but Theo insisted. “No Pralin,” he said. “You sleep inside, with us. It’s not safe.” They divided up the watch. Kaspar first, then Theo, then the twins, then Pralin. No sleeping, they agreed. Theo rubbed his eyes, straining to focus on anything in the darkness. He slept like a rock until Kaspar woke him.
There was a half-moon, and the mist had cleared. He kept watch, his bow in his hand, walking up and down beside the tent, trying to peer into the distance and to listen for anything that might be approaching. It felt like an eternity, and when he could stand it no more, he shook Jameth awake and slept again.
When he woke after that it was still dark. The moon was still somewhere above, casting thin beams of weak grey through the gaps in the tent over the sleeping forms of his brothers. He lay still, his mind spinning relentlessly.
Who could want them dead? There had been hours and hours of riding to think but he felt more bewildered than ever. He had tried to think of people who might have such a grudge against Father that they would want all of them dead, but he could not believe it of anyone in the government. The royal line had been unbroken since the days of Albrin, and the Temple taught faith in the divine decree of the kings. There had never, in all that time, been a civil war in Kalathan. The Hazari, although he had known they existed, were like something out of a children’s fairy tale, something he had known about but didn’t really want to believe. It must have been someone outside Kalathan who had sent them, he thought. There was just no other explanation, other than the one he did not want to think about – that he was ignorant and out of touch with what was really happening right under his nose. All that time in the archives and the libraries – perhaps he should rather have been more present above ground.
And then heard something outside. Not a bird call. Not the soft creep of an animal. He strained to hear, lifting his head up. When he heard it again, he caught a movement in the edge of his vision. Trina was sitting up. She turned to him. Although he could only just make out the shape of her in the darkness, he saw her hold her finger against her mouth.
They were still again, Trina sitting, Theo still lying on his back. The noise came again, closer, from behind the tent. One of the twins, perhaps, keeping watch? Trina moved towards the corner of the tent where she had been sleeping, on her hands and knees. Slowly, her movements fluid, she lifted her head towards the crack. There was a sliver of moonlight coming through; turning her profile into a silhouette.  She watched, for what seemed an age, then moved slowly back again, turning to him. He sat up, as slowly and silently as he could, straining to see her face. As soon as he was up, she made a sign he could not mistake. A finger, drawn against her throat.

Chapter 12
There was someone out there. They both heard the noise again. It was unmistakable now, the crunch of boots on the carpet of pine needles. One slow step at a time. He reached for his bow, which lay above where his head had been, and an arrow from the quiver beside it. It was painful, to have to be so quiet, knowing that something might happen at any moment. One of his brothers was out there, and perhaps the intruder had already found him. But he could not think about that. He had to concentrate, with all his might, on readying his bow.
Finally, he had it in his hands, and he crept towards Trina, who still knelt at the crack in the tent wall. She pointed, then moved carefully back, so he could get to it. When he did, and he saw what she had seen, he felt the bile rise in his throat. Focus, he tried to tell himself. Stay calm. To his left, he could just make out Jandrin sitting, leaning against a tree, his knees up in front of him, asleep. Not dead; he still had two hands on his sword, pushed into the ground in front of him. The man wore a black hood, a short black cape, and in the moonlight both the sword he carried in one hand and the long knife in his other glinted silver. The sword was curved slightly, the hand that held it, gloved. Hazari.
He could feel Trina beside him, warm and real. He could hear her slow breathing. This wasn’t a nightmare. The man looked around him, rested his eyes on Jandrin for a moment, then seemed to make a sign to someone behind him. So there were two. The man was close, barely four feet away. Theo knew that if he could manage to draw his bow, he could kill him. But if there were more of them coming, it was almost hopeless. If there was one more, he could hope that Jandrin would wake quickly and be able to defend himself, or that there would be time to intervene with another arrow. It would take precious seconds to wake Kaspar and Jameth, and Pralin had no weapon but a knife. Now was his chance. He looked at Trina. She looked steadily back at him.  She knew what he had to do. He steadied himself as much as he could on his knees, placed an arrow, pulled it back.
The man grunted as he fell, as Theo’s arrow pierced his temple. The cloak had obscured his body too much to trust his aim at the heart. But at the close range, the arrow hit its mark, the body hitting the ground with a thud. By then Jandrin had sprung up, his sword in his hand, and Theo had thrust himself through the crack in the tent wall out into the open, stumbling on numb legs. “On guard!” Theo shouted, almost at the same time as he realised he had no quiver on his back. But then Trina was there, like a ghost in her thin white shift, handing it to him. He grabbed an arrow, placed it, straining his eyes into the darkness, but there was nothing.
Jandrin looked at the man on the ground, blinking his eyes. “Another one,” Theo said, nodding in the direction he had seen the man make the sign. “I saw him signal to someone.”
“Do we follow?” asked Jandrin. By now Jameth and Kaspar were up, weapons in their hands.
“No.” Theo lowered his bow. “We don’t know how many. We might ride right into them.”
“Will they come back?” It was Trina, standing beside him, her arms clasped tightly against the crisp cold.
“I don’t think so,” he said. “They have lost surprise and perhaps they can see we are armed. But there was someone else there. They know where we are.”
Pralin nodded towards the east. “The sun will rise soon,” he said. “As soon as it does, we must be gone.”
“I’m sorry,” said Jandrin, frowning. “I fell asleep.”
“From now on, we watch in pairs,” said Theo.
“Theo?” A small voice came from inside the tent.
“Maikal.” Theo stepped back inside and crouched down. Trina came in too, picking up her jacket and slipping it on over her shift.
“What happened?” asked the boy, who was sitting up, clutching his covers to his chest. Ben, too, was sitting up, waiting for the answer.
“Someone tried to catch us,” said Theo. He had no idea what to say, defaulting to the truth. “But he didn’t. It’s all right now.”
“Did you get him?” asked Ben.
“He won’t hurt you now,” said Theo. He had killed another man. Was it only yesterday that he had pulled his arrow out of the fat priest’s heart? It felt like a lifetime ago. “It’s still night time, boys. You can go back to sleep.”
Maikal lay down again. “I want Mother,” he said, as he closed his eyes. Trina put out her hand and stroked his forehead.
“It’s all right,” she said softly. “You are safe now, Maikal. Try to sleep.”
Theo heard a bird begin to sing. It caught him somewhere, to see Trina’s tenderness towards his brother. It made him rub his eyes, fighting against the emotion that threatened to overflow. So do I, Maikal, he wanted to say. He thought of the hastily scribbled note and wondered if Maikal, or any of them, would ever see her again.

Chapter 13
Two whole days passed, each one taking them further and deeper into the forest. No one said anything more about Trina leaving them. Even Jandrin, she thought, would not condemn her to ride away alone into this forest. She did what she could to serve them and put away any thought of getting back to the city.
The days were dim under the canopy, the nights increasingly dark as the moon waned. Except for Maikal and Ben, who did not know the danger, the travellers slept lightly. Every day that did not bring the sound of hoofbeats behind them, and every night that did not bring another hooded, gloved visitor felt like a small victory, another chance at escape. The brothers and Pralin took turns to watch, in pairs now, and although Trina asked to be allowed to take her turn, she was bluntly turned down. She did not argue. But she knew she would not have fallen asleep, and she had experience with this kind of thing, with tuning her senses to danger. Although she was tired, she did not think the brothers were any better equipped for the task of keeping watch. All she lacked was a weapon, and the skill to use it.
They had heard wolves in the distance, found scorpions in their camps, and had their hands blistered by unexpectedly vicious plants. This forest was different to the forest near the city – it seemed to Trina to be wilder, more sinister, less welcoming. She recognised some of the plants and had found a few that could be added to a pot when they were able to make a fire again, but there were some she did not recognise at all. This was still Kalathan, yes, but a different Kalathan, an unfamiliar, less welcoming landscape.
There were arguments, after that first night, about where they were going and how to get there. Pralin, now that he had got them to the forest, admitted he was not sure of how to get through it, even of what was on the other side. The twins said they should return the way they had come and find the nearest town; that the townspeople would surely protect them. But Pralin said the towns around here were small, just market towns for the farmlands really. And the queen’s note had said that there was a price on their lives. That could mean there were others besides the Hazari looking for them. If there was a city, an army garrison nearby, that would have been a different story. But there was no city, no army outpost, no protection but the forest.
Eventually they agreed that it was best to do what the queen had said, to make for Ahrania. None of them had any idea who Dazmar was, or why he should help them, but there was nothing else to do. There had been no more visitors in the night and as time passed there was hope that the man Theo had killed had been a lone scout after all. But there had to be others. They would find the body eventually and know that they had been in the forest. They had to keep moving.
The four older brothers tried to recall what they had seen on maps. The road to the shrine had been a well-trodden one; there had been no need to bring maps with them. Trina listened and kept out of the conversations. She had a picture of Kalathan in her head too. As they argued she suspected that she knew at least as much as they did about where they were. The forest stretched almost to the border, after that there was a range of mountains. Beyond the mountains was the river, the very river that ran further south and east through the centre of Kalathan city. There was a town there, on the Kalathan side. It was Ben who remembered the name from his geography lesson, more recent for him than for any of the others. Gehaz. A small town, as far as any of them knew, usually accessed by the river. And across the river from Gehaz, a pass through more mountains towards the city of Orendal in Ahrania. So north and west it was, with only a rough, hopeful guess at where they would end up.
And there were arguments, too, as they rode, about what had happened at the shrine. Theo was angry, she realised, furious that they had been sent on this pilgrimage without being told what it was about. The twins were less concerned.
“How could Father have even considered it?” Theo raged. “Human sacrifice? It had to have been Shihazar’s idea.” Trina was riding behind Theo and Jandrin, Jameth ahead of them with Kaspar and Pralin leading with the younger boys. It was a still day, the forest was quiet, and she could hear everything they said.
“He must be desperate about what is happening on the border,” shrugged Jandrin. “He did what he thought he had to.”
Theo was not appeased. “I know he wants God’s help,” he said. “But what I don’t understand is how he thought that this was what God wanted. And how he thinks that crazy woman really speaks God’s words.”
“Well they were … you know,” said Jandrin, holding out his wrist. Trina was riding behind him and she heard and saw him plainly; he had not tried to hide it.
Theo turned around to look at Trina. She was used to people talking as Jandrin had just done, even when she was right there, and although she always felt the sting of the insult, she was resigned to it and felt no need to react. But Theo was insulted on her behalf, she realised with surprise. The look he gave her was plain: he was ashamed of what his brother had said and wanted her to know it.
“How can you say that in front of Trina, Jan?” he said, turning around again. “Devilclaws are human beings too. Besides, the Scriptures say …”
“Trina, whether she likes it or not, is cursed. That is what the Scriptures say, Theo, and she knows it better than you, it seems!”
“The Scriptures say that he who takes an innocent life is guilty of murder! Even if you believe they are cursed, it’s still murder!”
“Listen to yourself, Theo,” said Jandrin. “Father made the decision, even if Shihazar prompted him. You can’t question it, or start accusing him of murder!”
“I can’t question it? If Father is acting against the Scriptures, Jan, then …”
“Yes, yes,” said Jandrin, impatiently. “Either Father is wrong, or the Scriptures are. You don’t have to be so – what’s the word I want, Jay?”
“Fussy!” shouted Jameth, from up ahead.
“Yes, fussy,” said Jandrin. “Father is the king. He has the Spirit of God with him. If God tells him something, if he believes he is right about something, then it is so. You need to stop all this logical ‘if this then that’ rubbish, Theo. You’ll chase yourself in circles.”
“And when I am king, will I suddenly have this ability too?” Trina could tell Theo was agitated. “Will everything I say and think suddenly be right just because I am the king?”
“It might never happen, Theo,” said Jandrin. “Father is as healthy as an ox. He’ll live until he’s ninety and you will be an old man then. There’s no point thinking about that. Just accept that Father has God with him, and you can stop worrying and fussing like an old woman.”
“If you think all this, then why did you help Trina in the shrine?” asked Theo. “Why did you kill the guard for doing something you thought was perfectly all right?”
“I did not think it was perfectly all right, Theo!” Jandrin was getting agitated too now. “I didn’t say that I think it’s all right to sacrifice girls to Spirits. In the moment, defending them was the right thing to do, and that idiotic guard deserved what he got for trying to challenge me.  I’m just saying that you can’t doubt Father like this. But maybe we should have just …” He shrugged again.
“Let the priests kill them both?”
“This is a stupid conversation, Theo!” said Jandrin.
“You are being illogical!”
“Lands, Theo, I am not trying to be logical! I am just telling you to stop suggesting that Father didn’t have the right to do what he thought was necessary for Kalathan. I don’t care if it’s logical or not!”
“How can you not care about logic?”
“Very easily!”
Theo sighed loudly. It looked to Trina as if he was done arguing for now. He shook his head and let go of his reins, running his hands through his hair. Trina wanted to smile. She was tired, sad, scared and sore, and listening to the princes bicker was a welcome distraction from her weariness and discomfort – especially when one of them seemed to be so firmly on her side.
As the days passed, Trina found herself drawn to Maikal, taking on the little tasks of caring for him, of finding his clothes, helping him wash his face, putting him to bed. It still felt bizarre to be living with the princes, eating with them, camping with them, sleeping with them at night. Theo especially was awkward with her, sometimes ignoring her completely, at other times speaking to her and considering her as if she was an honoured guest. They still camped light: not making fires, sleeping all together in one tent. Theo had asked her to stop calling him “my lord”, and she was trying to remember. As the days passed, as Theo’s beard grew and even the twins began to look more like trappers or hunters than princes, it was easier. Maikal was unsettled and anxious, missing his mother, tired and bored by the hours and hours of riding. And they had to keep riding, covering as much distance as they could get out of the horses. She rode beside him, teaching him little songs, telling him stories. He responded with affection that she gladly returned, remembering her sister. He was just a little boy after all; a prince, but still a child.
On the third morning, one of the twins (she was still never sure which was which) pulled Maikal up to ride with him, and Trina found herself riding beside Theo. They were following a stream that seemed to be flowing away from them in the right direction, and there was space along the banks to ride side by side.
He asked how she had slept, and she felt her reply was as awkward as his question. It was becoming easier to talk to Kaspar and even to the twins, when they even noticed her, but it was different with Theo. She could not work out what he thought of her. Usually that would not bother her – she had learnt not to mind the opinions of others. She did not feel any longer as if she was a prisoner, but she had a sense that her fortunes were tied to theirs. If they reached Ahrania safely, if this threat was ever resolved – what would happen to her? Would Ahranians care about her being a devilclaw? Could she begin a new life there? Did she want to? She had no idea. For now, she knew, she had no choice but to stay with them.
“I want to say,” he continued, after the stilted conversation about how they had slept, “that I appreciate what you do for Maikal.”
“Thank you,” she said, surprised. “But I’m not doing it for thanks.”
“Why are you doing it? You could have left us by now.”
She shook her head. Like Kaspar, he could not understand. He was a man, he was a prince; he had no idea. “You don’t understand. I couldn’t have left. I’m a woman and a devilclaw. I would rather be running away from assassins than be thrown back into prison.”
“Really?”
“There’s more chance of freedom this way. And the food is better.”
He grinned. “I don’t believe that. It might be if I could hunt and if we could actually make a fire.”
“Maybe I am doing my duty,” she said. “You saved my life. So I serve you.”
“It amazes me that you can say that,” he said. “You have been persecuted, unjustly imprisoned and almost murdered. How can you speak about duty?”
“I don’t know,” she said. “It wasn’t you who did those things to me.”
He was quiet for a while. She wondered if he was done, if he would ride ahead now. But then he spoke again. “What do you think of the divine right?” he asked.
“The divine right?” She was startled at the change of subject and not sure what he meant.
“I mean the belief that the king rules with God’s authority. That he is placed on the throne by God himself.”
“Is that what you and Jandrin were talking about the other day?”
“Yes,” he said. “Exactly that.”
“That sounds like a question one of the king’s interrogators might ask someone to test her loyalty. I am not sure I should answer.”
Theo looked at her. “It does. But I am asking because I want to know what you think. Your loyalty isn’t in question. After what has happened you don’t owe it anymore.”
“Well then – when it comes to God and his will, I don’t have much of an opinion,” said Trina. “I am not even sure if there is a God at all.”
Theo was silent, his forehead creased.
“I only say that because we are deep in the forest and there’s no one around. If I said that in the city I could be arrested,” said Trina, looking sideways at Theo.
“I know,” he said, smiling a little. “But I am glad to hear you say it.”
“Glad? To hear me cast doubt on the authority of the king? You could be sending me to get my head chopped off.”
“No, no,” he said, smiling a little. “It means you are not afraid of me. It means you are saying what you really think.”
“Why, my lord, do you care what I think?” It was a puzzle to her, that he asked her opinion. Except for her parents, no one had ever cared much about that.
“I don’t know, Trina,” he said. “I just do. And please, try not to call me your lord.”
They rode in silence for a while. Trina shifted in her saddle, stretching her back. Theo reached down to his saddlebags and took out two apples, offering one to her. She took it and held it in her hand.
“I am heir to this kingdom,” he said at last. “I am heir to a crown and a faith that have been honoured and obeyed for centuries. People seldom question any of it. But it’s not enough for me, that things have just always been this way. I want to know what is good, and right. I want to know what is true.”
She didn’t know what to say.
“Everyone else I could ever talk to has a reason to accept things as they are, or at least not to admit any doubts to me because of who I am. I have all these questions about the Temple, about our faith, about our history, and I have not been able to tell anyone about them. After hearing the story of your life, and after what happened at the shrine – I feel more than ever that something is wrong, Trina, that something is rotten in Kalathan. Our faith is not what it claims to be. If we survive this, I can’t go back to lapping it all up like a child because of who I am. I want to talk to someone. I want to talk to you.”
Trina stared at him, at his earnest expression, at the plea in his eyes. “If you don’t have faith in the Temple, that undermines everything.”
“Yes,” he said. “Everything.”
“Kalathan would not be Kalathan without the Temple and the king.”
“No. Can you understand, though, why I want to know the truth?”
“Yes. I think I do.”
“I think you do too,” he said. He smiled, for a moment, and she found herself smiling back. What a burden to carry. She had never thought of what it must be like, all that responsibility, all the history and tradition bearing down on him. She had been in prison, yes, but no one had ever tried to capture her thoughts. She had not been free to say what she wanted, but she had always been free to think. Her opinions had not mattered to anyone but herself. But Theo’s opinions could shake foundations. His ideas could change history. For the first time she considered just what the privilege of high birth meant.
“I think,” she said, carefully, “that it will be good for Kalathan, to have a king like you. The world cannot stay as it is forever. And if there are things that need to change …”
“Of course there are things that need to change!”
“Yes, of course,” she said, a little taken aback at his vehemence. “Then perhaps you are the one who will bring that change.”
“If we ever get home,” he said.
“If there is a God, a true God, then we can pray to him to help you.”
“Pray?” Theo looked amused.
“I used to go to the Temple with my parents sometimes,” she said. “Before I got my mark and was banned. I remember looking up at the roof of the Temple and talking to God in my mind, as if he could hear me. I thought if he could understand the Old Tongue then he could just as well understand ordinary speech.”
Theo grinned. “I remember thinking that as a child too. I wondered why God liked hearing prayers in the Old Tongue and not in Kalath, when Kalath was so much easier to understand.”
“I thought if he didn’t understand my words he wasn’t much of a God.”
“So you were a rebel even then,” smiled Theo.
“I’ve always talked to him. I have raged at him sometimes. The Temple would say that I shouldn’t do that but maybe he’s there. Maybe he hears me. I don’t know.”
“Did you pray when that priest was about to kill you in the shrine?”
“I did,” she said. “And then you saved me.”
Theo’s horse stopped suddenly, to pull at a clump of grass, and Trina’s obedient little pony stopped too. She looked at Theo, and he looked at her, and she felt a tug at her heart. All those times she had stood at the side of the road and watched the princes ride by on their way to worship, when she had thought Theo was sullen and grumpy, she had been wrong. He had just been – lonely, perhaps. Burdened. Searching. All those times she had been looking at this man, who although he was physically the image of his father, was not, after all, going to be the one to continue the injustices of his reign. And in the brightness of the morning, he was looking at her with respect, with appreciation, with something that even seemed close to admiration. And there was something else in his look too, something that made her turn away from the picture he made, sitting strong and straight on his horse, his bow on his back, his smooth, strong hands on the reins. Something that made her turn away, her cheeks flushed, nudge her pony in the sides and ride on.

Chapter 14
It was Maikal, later that afternoon, who noticed something. “What’s that?” he said to Theo, looking back the way they had come as they were about to get back on their horses after a brief break beside a small stream to scrounge in the packs for food and stretch their legs. Theo looked back and saw what he had seen: a flash, a brief glint of something coming from the patch of trees they had left a while before. If it came from a weapon, the person carrying it was far off. But he could see that person in his mind’s eye: a hooded figure, a knife at his waist, a sword or a bow ready.
They had come up with a plan, in case this was to happen. Pralin took Maikal and Ben and all the horses and went ahead. Theo and the others took cover. They never stopped for anything until Theo had made sure that there was some kind of cover. This time there was a small rise in the broad, flat passage of land beside the stream, on top of which was an enormous rotting log big enough to hide behind, and two or three climbable trees. Kaspar climbed up a tree with his bow, the tree they had selected for this exact purpose before they had even stopped. Soon he was high enough in the dense branches that he could not easily be noticed from the ground. Jan and Jay hid behind the thick trunks of trees that grew on the small rise, their knives in their hands, hidden under their shirts in case the reflections were to betray them. Theo was close to them, crouching behind the log. There was even the remains of a branch rising vertically from the log, so if he had to he could aim his bow and shoot from a reasonably protected position. If that flash they had seen came indeed from their pursuers, then if there were not too many of them it was an excellent position. But as Theo crouched down he realised with an angry shock that Trina had not left with Pralin and the boys.
“What are you doing?” he whispered as she crouched down behind the log too. “You’re supposed to be with Pralin!” This was not what they had discussed.
“We might need a diversion,” she said.
“You?” he hissed.
“Yes, me. I can lie in the path, pretending to be hurt. If someone comes, they will focus their attention on me and you can take them by surprise.” She put her hands to the ground, dug through the pine needles and began rubbing dirt onto her face and her arms.
“No, Trina,” he said. “It’s too dangerous. You need to stay where you are.”
“Theo.” Trina’s expression was determined. It confused him and shocked him that she would defy him like this. He had told her to go with Pralin and she had not obeyed. He could not understand it. “If these are the Hazari you won’t fool them easily. Unless they are distracted you don’t have a chance. Even if you manage to pick off one, the others …”
“You need to stay where you are,” he said. “I won’t let you put yourself in danger like that!”
“Don’t tell me what to do!” They faced each other for a second, both determined not to give in. “It’s not only your lives that are at stake!” But then they heard it – the shuffling sounds of hooves over the pine needles, the faint clinking of harness.
“I’m going to do it, Theo,” said Trina, grabbing the front of her dress in both hands, and pulling as hard as she could to rip the buttons off. He saw a flash of the white shift beneath as she began to get up. “Just don’t shoot me by mistake.”
She flashed him a smile, and she was up, slipping down the small slope and onto the flat part by the stream. She lay down in the pine needles, facing towards whoever was coming, her eyes closed, almost invisible against the ground in her dull, brown dress.
Theo sat down with his back to the log, his heart racing. He could see Jan and Jay; they both looked at him questioningly. He shrugged, hoping they would understand what to do. He looked up at Kaspar in the tree, who pointed silently at Trina and nodded his head.
He turned around and edged up so he could see her. She lay there, still, as if she was dead. Lands, she’s brave, he thought. He could not deny that this plan was better, that a distraction would give them a better chance. But he didn’t like it either, that she had put herself in danger like this.
They waited, for what seemed like a very long time. The weight of dread pressed down on Theo – they had been lucky before, but they might not escape this. This might be the end, the last day of his life. And if it wasn’t, he would have to kill someone, again. There was no way this could turn out all right. God, if you are out there, he prayed desperately, remembering what Trina had said. If you are out there, help us. Let me live to find the truth, to save my family and my country. He clasped his bow tightly, hoping that he would get a chance to save Trina’s life, that his aim would be true again. He had looked into her big grey eyes that morning and felt something he had never felt before: a desire to know her, to talk to her, to listen to her. He wanted more. He wanted time. He wanted to live.
He stayed low, straining his ears to hear what he could. He heard the noises of the horsemen approach, and another noise too – a low crying and whimpering. Trina. She was playing her part.
“A woman,” he heard. A man’s gruff voice, probably less than ten paces away from him. In the crisp, clean air he could hear every word.
“Careful,” said another. “It might be a trap. Get your weapons ready.”
“There’s no woman with them,” said the first voice. “That guard at the shrine said they were alone. Maybe we’ve been tracking some outlaws or bandits after all.”
Theo closed his eyes. So the guard had lied for them. This was good.
“She’s in a bad way,” said the first voice. “I can’t believe the precious princes would have done that to anyone. But it’s still suspicious.” He raised his voice. “Oi! Someone on the road here!” There were more of them, then. Just two would have been too good to be true. Theo wondered if he dared to look now.
He heard the other horses approach. At least two more, he thought. It was impossible to tell. He looked up at Kaspar in the tree, who silently held up four fingers. He nodded back.
Trina carried on with her intermittent moaning and crying. It was uncomfortable, listening to that. She was very convincing. “All right,” he heard, from one of the horsemen. A third voice. “Get down and see what the problem is. We could take her along with us, if she’s not in too bad a state!” He laughed, and Theo breathed deep, clenching his fists. He heard the noise of someone dismounting. It was working then – they were distracted. He needed to see now. He caught Jan and Jay’s eyes briefly, then pointed to his eyes to show he was going to look. They nodded slowly, still holding their knives under their shirts. He looked up at Kaspar, still in the tree. They couldn’t risk this taking a long time. Kaspar was very exposed up there. If anyone saw him, he would be so easy to pick off. Time was running out.
He stood up, as carefully as he could, turning towards the log and then moving up. Behind the vertical branch he peered out, barely daring to breathe. He couldn’t even see Trina now; two Hazari, dressed in black but without their hoods and gloves, were leaning over her. He could see that one had a bow, at the ready in his hand, but the other was hidden behind him, crouching down beside Trina. He heard a laugh, and thought he saw Trina’s body moving as she was shoved or kicked, he wasn’t sure which. There were two more on horses, also unmasked, hovering a few feet away, one picking his teeth and staring around as if he was bored. This man had a bow too, with an arrow in his hand ready to be placed, but he didn’t seem to be concerned that he might need it urgently. The other had a long sword at his belt.
“What’s wrong with her?” asked one of the men on horseback. 
“She’s thin as a rake,” said one of the first men. “Sores all over her body – look.” He stood back for the man on the horse to see. Theo bristled. The first man had pulled up her sleeves.
“Check the left wrist,” said the man on horseback.
The first man gave a low whistle. “A devilclaw,” he said. “Maybe she was with some hunters and they found out and tossed her.”
This was the moment. They were focussed on Trina. If he took a shot, and so did Kaspar, and the twins each threw a knife and then went in with their swords, they had a chance. They actually had a chance to overcome these men. But he felt as if his limbs had tuned to lead. It was a little like he remembered learning to dive, from a high rock in the lake near their summer palace in the South. That feeling of fear before the leap, not knowing for sure that he would succeed, thinking always of the danger of rocks below.
But then Trina moaned again, as if she was really in pain, as if someone had really hurt her, as if she really needed help, and he knew he had to do it, now. He stood straight silently and lifted his bow, aiming for one of the men hovering over Trina. He hoped that his brothers could see what he was doing and would take their cue. They needed to work together, or this could all turn into a tragedy.
His arrow hit its mark, in the back of the neck, and the man fell, it seemed to him, right onto Trina. Almost simultaneously he heard the whizz of another arrow from above, and one of the men on the horses cried out, clutching at his chest.
“Ambush!” yelled the other man on the horse, reaching for his bow. “It’s a trap!” But the horse reared in fright and Jandrin’s knife did not meet its mark; instead of hitting the man the silver dagger hit the horse in the flank. Theo had another arrow on his string already, aiming at the other man on the ground who he saw with terror was aiming upwards, towards Kaspar in the tree.
“Up there!” yelled the man to his companion, whose horse was squealing with pain. Theo aimed, but his hand shook as he released the string; the arrow missed and glanced uselessly off the man’s leather-clad leg.
And then he wasn’t very sure what was happening. He heard Jan and Jay rushing past him on his right, and Kaspar leaping down from the tree. Leaping, not falling, so he hadn’t been hit after all. The man on the injured horse drew his sword faster than Theo had thought it was possible to draw a sword, and in the edge of his vision he caught a flash of his face, of his angry, almost irritated expression as he faced the twins. But he knew he didn’t need to be concerned for Jan and Jay; they were ridiculously capable with their swords, and at the shrine he had seen that Jan, at least, could be quick and even ruthless. But Kaspar, trying to be a hero, and Trina, in the middle of it all – Theo felt as if he was wading through mud, trying to draw his own sword and get past the log to the lower ground where they were. The man still standing on the ground aimed his bow again at Kaspar, who was charging at him, sword drawn, and for an awful moment Theo thought he had released the arrow. But as Kaspar reached him and lunged with his sword, the man leapt easily to the side, dropping his bow and drawing both his curved sword and a sharp, narrow-bladed knife.
It amazed Theo afterwards, how much he had been able to think in those moments, as he saw Kaspar lunge and step back, dodging the Hazari’s first swipe at him. Kaspar was skilled, yes, but he was inexperienced, only seventeen, still not at his full strength. In the dreadful seconds it took for Theo to get across the distance between them, he was more afraid than he had been since any of this had begun. He heard blades clashing behind him; the mounted man had not yet fallen to the twins. He wanted, desperately, to look down at the ground at Trina, to see if she was all right, but his eyes were locked now on the assassin’s, unexpectedly wide and blue.
“Prince,” he said, holding both weapons out towards him and Kaspar, his mouth wide beneath a narrow black moustache. “We have been looking for you.” There was no fear at all in his face, only confidence. It was terrifying.
“And you have found us,” Theo managed to say, not daring to take his eyes off him. He could still hear the fight behind him, the swords clashing, the grunts of all three as they fought. If that man could defend himself against two swordsmen like the twins...
“Only two of us left now to share the price,” smiled the man, nodding his head towards his fallen companion. “Thanks to you.” Again, Theo dared not look down. One slip in concentration and this man would have those weapons through both him and Kaspar. If Theo were to strike at him now, the man would most likely block his thrust, then use the other weapon to strike back. He felt paralysed again. He heard one of the twins cry out, and his heart sank. Perhaps this was the end. They had felled two, but these were Hazari; they were no match for them and it wasn’t enough.
But then there was another cry, and this time it was from Trina, who from her position on the ground had kicked out with all her strength at the Hazari’s ankles. It wasn’t enough to knock him over, but it surprised him and made him stumble, and it was all that Theo needed. He stepped forward and with his sword struck the sword from the Hazari’s hand as he tried to find his balance, then lost no time driving his own deep into his breast.
The man fell forward onto Theo, hardly making a sound, crumpling to the ground at his feet as Theo pulled out his weapon, his hand shaking, his vision clouding. He closed his eyes as soon as he knew it was done. Oh God, he pleaded in his mind, dropping to his knees beside the body. Oh God, please, no more killing.
Then he remembered the others and turned around. Jan and Jay stood over their Hazari, who lay beside his horse, as crumpled and still as the moustached man. Trina was up on her knees, pushing the dishevelled hair from her pale, dirt-smudged face. He met her eyes for a moment, and she smiled through her relief. She had been right. Her plan had worked. He looked for Kaspar, who had stumbled off to the side and was retching into the undergrowth. They were all safe, all his brothers, Trina and Pralin. Not even hurt, it seemed. Trina was getting up, stumbling over to him, concern on her face now. I’m all right too, he wanted to say. It’s over. We did it. But he found he could not open his mouth to speak, and although he was aware of Jan and Jay beside him, he could not make out what they were saying. He looked down, wondering why his shoulder felt so strange and hot suddenly. The image of the moustached man’s silver knife, protruding absurdly from his body, was the last thing he saw before the blackness spread, and he fell forward into Trina’s arms.

Chapter 15
Trina held her hands out to the fire. She had so missed it, the comforting blaze of a campfire, the warmth and the promise of protection it seemed to offer. Kaspar had gone out with one of the twins that morning, she wasn’t sure which one, and managed to shoot a few birds. The meat had not gone far between them, but it was their first hot meal since leaving the shrine and they all felt better for it. Now Pralin fussed over the fire with a kettle, hanging it over the contraption of poles that had been in one of the packs. He filled it with water that Ben carried to him from the stream, and as the late afternoon light began to turn golden-red, Trina closed her eyes and wondered if she dared to begin to feel safe again.
She heard a noise from the tent behind her and turned to see Theo crawling awkwardly out of the entrance of the smaller tent. She turned back to the fire, feeling suddenly shy. She had felt so afraid when he had collapsed the day before – after the relief they had all felt when the last Hazari had fallen it had been such a shock to see the blood pouring from his body, for it to be Theo lying on the ground beside the black-caped figures of their attackers. But she had known what to do; padding the wound with cloths, keeping him still and quiet, and she had even found dried herbs in a box Pralin had produced from the packs to grind into a paste that would help with the healing. He had come around fairly quickly afterwards, mortified at having fainted like a woman, he said.
“Like a woman?” she had asked, raising her eyebrows.
“Not a woman like you,” he had replied. And she had not been able to help herself – she had warmed inside at the compliment, at the look of respect he had given her.
The twins and Kaspar had dug shallow graves for the assassins, and they had moved on to camp a little further up the stream. The injured horse they had needed to put out of its misery; Trina had seen the vultures circling earlier that day and had felt sorry for the poor beast, more than for the men whom she had helped to haul away from the road. The other horses they kept with them, and the weapons and food too. Trina had asked if she could keep the silver dagger, and it sat now at her belt. She had almost asked for a bow and a sword too, but she knew there would be no point carrying those around when she had no idea how to use them. But a knife, especially one as sharp as this one, was comforting to have. The little one Sabine had given her had helped to save her life. They could hope now that they were safe, but they could not be sure. Five or six, the messenger had said. Five were dead; whether or not there was a sixth there was no way to know. And there could be more.
But now was not the time to be running. The immediate danger was past and Theo needed to rest, so they had made a fire and stayed for a day.  She had kept busy, washing clothes in the stream, helping Pralin to sort out the supplies, tending to Theo, keeping an eye on Maikal. She had even found a private spot further downstream and had a very cold but very refreshing wash herself. They would leave again the next morning, continuing their journey out of Kalathan towards Ahrania.
Theo walked stiffly over to the fire and sat down on the log beside her and Kaspar. He was pale, the stubble on his chin really looking scraggly now, his shirt stained with a little blood where it had seeped through the bandages. On the other side of the fire, Jandrin and Jameth were tuning their instruments, Ben looking on, sitting cross-legged on the ground. Now that the kettle was set up, Pralin was going through the food the Hazari had carried, handing the ever-hungry Maikal bits of the dried fruit and meat he found.
“You should be lying down,” Trina said to Theo.
“Yes, Theo, go and lie down,” said Kaspar, imitating her tone, smiling at the scowl it produced on his brother’s face.
“Too much lying down,” said Theo, moving his shoulder, carefully, steadying it with his other hand. “I’ve never done so much lying down in my life. And it’s feeling all right.”
Trina smiled to herself. He was not the easiest patient. The strong, healthy ones never were, her mother always said.
“So your mother is a healer?” he asked. “You seem to know so much.”
“Yes.” Trina poked the fire with a stick, watching the end ignite and glow. “She taught me. I couldn’t go to school, after I was found out. After this,” she said, holding up her wrist.
“I didn’t know there were healers in the city other than at the Temple hospitals,” he said. “I thought people went to them when they needed help.”
“Oh no,” said Trina. “Some of the priests in the hospitals are skilled but many are not. They might just pray for you in the Old Tongue, pour some pigeon blood on you and send you home with a tonic. My mother had many patients. But they mostly didn’t want me to touch them.”
Theo was quiet. “There is so much I don’t know about my own home,” he said. “I have spent so much time buried in the past that I am ignorant of the present.”
Trina shrugged. “Knowing the past is important too. I loved reading about Kalathan’s history. When my father was alive he brought me books, as many as he could, from a friend who was a school teacher. We would learn together.”
“I wondered,” said Theo.
“Wondered what?”
“Why you sound as if you are educated.”
“I sound educated?” Trina was pleased.
“I thought you must be,” said Kaspar. “Aren’t you?”
“I just read a lot,” she said. “There wasn’t much for a devilclaw child to do in the winters other than read.”
The twins began to sing, a slow lilting ballad this time. The others listened in silence, as the sun sank lower and the shadows grew longer. The kettle began to bubble, and Pralin came back to the fire, Maikal behind him carrying cups. Trina got up and helped to make the tea, bringing Theo a steaming cup when it was done.
“Up and about, brother?” asked Jandrin, putting aside his lute to accept a cup from Pralin. “Not going to faint on us again, are you?”
“Come on Jan,” said Kaspar. “It wasn’t his fault.”
Jandrin shrugged. He had a small scar on his chin, Trina noticed, and his hair was a little longer on his shoulders than Jameth’s. She was learning to tell them apart now. Jandrin mostly ignored her, and although Jameth was distant he was a little more polite. After the ambush she had sensed a change, though, a small shift in the level of their interest in her.
“Oh no,” said Jandrin, shaking his head. “No one can blame you, Theo. Even Kaspar lost his guts there, afterwards.” He laughed, clapping his brother on the back.
“We killed four men,” said Kaspar, sullenly. “It’s nothing to laugh about.”
“Four assassins,” said Jameth, draining his tea. “Four men who took money to murder us. The world is a better place without them. It was them or us. Don’t forget that.”
“Of course I won’t forget that,” said Kaspar. “But still. We killed them.”
“Your first, little brother,” said Jameth. “You did well. You should be proud of yourself.”
Kaspar shook his head, and Trina noticed him glance at Theo, who gave him a more sympathetic look. She agreed with him – they had had no choice but to defend themselves, but still, it had been awful. Death was awful, even on the face of a killer.
“Trina didn’t flinch,” said Jandrin. “She’s a tough one, isn’t she? Good things those priests didn’t get to slit her throat in the shrine.” He laughed again, pulling his finger against his neck and making a face.
“Don’t talk like that, Jan,” said Theo. “Show some respect. Without Trina things might have turned out very different. We probably owe her our lives.”
Jandrin held up his hands. “No disrespect intended, brother,” he said. “Honestly – I had no idea there were women like Trina in the world, who would think to stab a priest and kick an assassin in the leg.”
“You don’t know much about women, then,” said Trina, matter-of-factly.
Jandrin and Jameth looked at each other and laughed again. Kaspar rolled his eyes. “They think they are experts,” he said to Trina. “Just because the girls at the palace follow them around like sick puppies, they think they know everything.”
“We know more than you, little brother,” said Jameth, grinning suggestively. “Unless that pretty little girl with the green eyes that I saw you with taught you something I don’t know yet.”
Kaspar shook his head again, staring into the flames, cradling his cup. “I just talked to her,” he said. “She’s a sweet girl, and she was missing her family.”
“A sweet girl!” teased Jandrin.
“The girls at the palace are nothing like Trina,” said Theo, to her surprise. “Most of them have grown up in palaces or on estates and have spent their lives embroidering and reading and playing with cats. Don’t you see? They are there for us to make our selections and take what we want. They are trained to stroke our egos and make us feel good about ourselves. Trina has suffered, because of the laws our father has put in place, and she still risked her life for us yesterday. She’s not just a tougher version of the girls you know. We’re all in this together now. She’s one of us.”
Trina stared at him. Had he really just said that she was one of them?
“Whoa, brother,” said Jameth. “Strong words!” He turned to Trina. “If there are other women out there like you, Trina, I am very interested to meet them.”
“Thank you,” said Trina. “I used to watch you all, you know. On the processions to the Temple.”
“Really?” Kaspar was interested. “You were in those crowds?”
“I was for years,” she smiled. “I remember the first time you came along, Maikal, sitting beside your mother on the carriage. You had a little toy in your hand, and you held it up and waved. Everyone cheered.”
Maikal was excited to hear Trina’s memories, and for a while they all talked comfortably about the processions, about the girls who came every week to watch, and how funny it was that she had been one of them. She remembered the lovely clothes, and for the first time she felt that the twins were really talking to her as they reminisced about the silks and the furs, the crowns and the turbans, the jewelled weapons and harnesses. Kaspar was interested too, and the younger two, but Theo was quiet, rubbing his shoulder slowly as he sat, his cup of tea in his other hand.
There were more songs, more tea, and a pleasant sharing of some of the food they had found in the Hazari’s packs. Theo went to his bed in the small tent, where he had slept the previous night with Pralin to watch him. As he got up, she followed, to change his bandage before he went to sleep, pouring a bowl of hot water from the kettle and bringing it with her.
“Perhaps you should sleep here, instead of me,” he said, as she helped him to take off his shirt. He sat cross-legged on the quilt, his back straight. The wound was healing well already; he had told her it hardly hurt any more. He said he had even slept well the night before, and she was encouraged – if it had not begun to fester by now there was hope that it would not.
“Alone?” She did not want to sleep in a tent alone.
“It doesn’t seem right,” he said. “You in there with all of us.”
“I don’t want to sleep alone,” she said. “Please. I’m all right, really. I trust you.” She realised what that sounded like, and smiled as she removed the bloody bandage, winding it off around his body. The wound was just under his shoulder, and she had had to tie the strips around his whole chest to keep them on. It was laughable, to think that one of the princes might want to try something with her. It had honestly not crossed her mind.
“You are safe with us, Trina,” he said, earnestly.
“I don’t doubt that,” she said. “And besides, as Jandrin said, I am hardly one of your pretty court girls.” She rummaged in the bag of things she had taken from the supplies to care for his wound – some strips of cloth for bandages, the herbs that helped with pain and took the swelling down, the small knife. “I can wash those,” she said, nodding to the bloody ones she had just removed. “They aren’t very dirty but if we change them twice a day there’s a better chance of it healing properly.”
“You are nothing like them at all,” said Theo.
“You could have chosen one by now,” she said, wetting a cloth in the hot water and pressing it to the wound, letting the warmth and the moisture soak up the crusted blood. “People are always talking about why you haven’t. Your father was married when he was your age.”
“I’ve been waiting,” he said, wincing a little.
“For what?”
“To find someone I could talk to.”
“Surely they can all talk,” she said, cheekily.
“Don’t make me laugh while you’re doing that,” he grinned, steadying himself with his other arm.
“All done.” She put down the cloth and applied the paste. “This is going to sting, sorry.”
He closed his eyes as it smarted. “Ow,” he said. “They can talk, yes. About music and poetry and clothes and birds.”
“Birds?” she laughed.
“Birds. One had a flock of canaries at home. She never talked about anything else.”
“No wonder you’re waiting,” she said.
“And I was waiting to feel something.” Theo’s voice was quieter now. “Something more than just appreciation of a pretty face. The woman I marry will be a queen someday. She will have to share the burden with me, as my mother does for Father. It would be best, I think, if I could offer her more than a crown and a life of being stared at. I want to choose someone I can love.”
Trina was silent, busily tucking in the ends of the bandage, making sure it was secure. She had never thought that a prince would need to hope and wait for love just the same as anyone else. She had assumed that happiness, including things like love, must come easier for people like Theo.
“I think we owe you our lives, Trina,” he said, quietly. “I meant what I said. And any debt you may have felt is more than repaid.” They could hear the singing outside, the twins leading the others in the rowdy song about the tinker that the old priest had enjoyed so much.
“We did it together,” she said. “You can’t give me the credit, Theo. Those men didn’t die by my sword.”
He smiled. “You called me Theo.”
“That’s what you wanted, isn’t it?” She was packing up the things in the box, now, gathering up the dirty bandages.
“Yes,” he grinned. “I prefer it.”
“It’s still strange to use your name. Your names,” she corrected. “For all of you.”
“I can understand that,” he said. She helped him put his shirt back on, and he lowered his arm, cautiously.
“There,” she said. “All finished.”
“You had a bath,” he said suddenly, reaching out to touch her hair, which was still damp on her shoulders.
Trina froze. She had been about to get up and leave, to put the box away and get ready for bed herself. She had been feeling happy, almost contented for the first time in so long, enjoying the evening and the fire, the laughing and the talking. But now, after telling her she had nothing to worry about, Theo was touching her hair, looking at her in a way that made her heart almost stop still. She had seen that look before, that hungry look, in the eyes of men who had wanted something more than conversation from her. But this was Theo, the prince of Kalathan, who had saved her life, who had not two minutes ago been talking about love and marriage – and blast it all now if he wasn’t moving in to kiss her.

Chapter 16
When Theo woke in the morning his wound was throbbing, but his pride hurt worse than his shoulder. What had he been thinking last night? It had been an impulse, a stupid, rash decision that he wished with all his heart he hadn’t made. She had just suddenly looked so lovely to him in the candlelight, her hair damp on her shoulders, her kind, clever eyes smiling at him, and he had acted without thinking anything other than that he wanted to kiss her. She had been perfectly justified in slapping him; if he thought about it, he could understand her anger and hurt and surprise. But at the same time, he was disappointed. He hadn’t kissed a lot of girls but the ones he had had never been less than enthusiastic. And he had hoped (of course he had, or he would not have done it) that she had felt it too.
Damn it all, he thought, as he sat up stiffly, glancing over at Pralin who still snored softly beside him. Felt what? He had said something about love, and about his future queen, and then he had tried to kiss her. Lands, he was an idiot. He could not expect her to know that he was not trying to seize the opportunity, to get what he could from her. Kings could demand what they wanted, his father knew it and when it came to girls, so did Jandrin and Jameth. That wasn’t what he had been thinking at all. He wasn’t like that; he had never behaved like his brothers did. He did not take girls to his room and make promises he had no intention of keeping. He had always been careful, respectful, cautious to the extreme, eager to avoid drama. Except for now. Except for last night. He had deserved the stinging slap, the look of betrayal, the swift exit.
She did not look at him as they packed up and prepared to leave. She helped with breakfast, fussed with Maikal, worked hard as she always did. She had spilt his tea as she handed it to him and not apologised. She did not offer to change his bandages, and he did it himself in the end, clumsily, with one hand. By the time they rode off into the morning light, he was beginning to think he had ruined everything.
They rode on, stopping every now and then to decide on a direction. The landscape began to change a little and they all sensed they were going higher, and when the trees cleared every now and then they could see the mountains looming grey in the distance. Beyond those mountains was the river, somewhere, and the edge of Kalathan itself. It was a strange feeling, to think of travelling beyond Kalathan to another land. He never had, neither had his father or anyone else he knew. Kalathan had no need of any of its neighbours, no need of trade or conversation with any other peoples. Kalathan had enough grain, enough forest, enough ore in the mines to take care of itself. Kalathan could forge its own weapons, print its own books and mint its own coins. There was a little trade with Mandaria in the East and the towns in the Indus Valley, in spices and silk and paper, in a few of their clever inventions and the shiny little treasures that the ladies of the court loved so much. Ahrania, he knew, was no threat; it was a small, insignificant nation. But beyond and below Ahrania, and stretching far to the west, was the Western Empire, ruled by an Emperor who wanted more from Kalathan than Father was prepared to give. It was the same in the East, with Mandaria – Kalathan needed no one, and wanted no interference, but the other nations were not satisfied, even warring sometimes to force the king to give in to their demands for trade and diplomacies. The king was strong on this, and any trouble with foreign nations stemmed from this one requirement – that the holy nation of Kalathan would never become a highway to be trampled all over by traders and merchants.
He wondered what Gehaz would be like, if they ever got there. So far away from the city, would it even feel like the same country? Would he and his brothers be recognised? Perhaps this was something good that might come out of all that had happened: that he would see more of Kalathan.
But Trina, riding ahead of him on her pony, refusing to meet his eyes – this was not good. Eventually he caught up with her, with a decent distance between them and the nearest brother to ensure a private conversation.
“Will you talk to me? Please?”
She was silent, staring ahead.
“I’m sorry, Trina. It was stupid of me.”
“I slapped you,” she said, after a while. “I slapped the crown prince of Kalathan!” As if she was angry with herself, not him.
“And he deserved it. He really, really deserved it.”
“If you just wanted a kiss maybe I should have just let you have that. Although I can’t understand why on earth you would want that from me.” She sounded puzzled now, rather than angry.
“You don’t owe me anything, Trina. I just thought, stupidly, that you wanted to, and I am sorry. But I was not trying to take advantage of you.”
She turned in her saddle to face him. “I didn’t want to believe that of you.”
“I hope you don’t.”
“I know we are far away from everything, and we could have died the other day, but it doesn’t change anything. You are who you are, and I am what I am. Whatever happens now, that’s not going to change. I won’t be the kind of woman …”
“No,” said Theo, interrupting her, feeling determined to make her understand that was not his intention. “I don’t want that either. I want …”
He stopped. What did he want? Only impossible things. Only to be just a man getting to know a girl, a wonderful girl who cared more about history and medicine than she did about cats and clothes, a girl who he suspected may have more courage than he did himself.
“I want you not to be angry with me,” he said, in the end.
“I’m not angry with you,” she said, shaking her head.
“Good, then,” he said, trying to smile. His shoulder hurt like the blazes, and he was tired of trying to be cheerful.  Those mountains were far away, weeks away, perhaps, and there was no way to know what lay between.
Somehow, he made it through the day. The wound bled a little, but it was still looking good, and although it was stiff and sore it did not hurt as much as it had that first day. His back ached, though, with sitting upright and trying not to move his shoulder too much, and his head too. Maikal was bored again, crying and complaining, asking for cakes and baked chicken as if they had a magic kitchen in one of the packs.
“Maikal, please,” he had said, as they began to set up camp for the night. “We only have the food we brought. You're a big boy now, you know we don’t have any of those things.”
But Maikal would not be reasoned with; he sulked and complained until Pralin pitched the small tent and Trina crawled inside with him to tell him a story. Theo sat on the ground against a tree, not enjoying feeling sore and weak and useless, as Pralin and his brothers pitched the other tent and made a fire. He wished he could take his bow and look for something to shoot for supper; maybe if they stayed for a while in one place, he could find a boar. But they had to make do with what they had, which wasn’t much, and they had to keep moving. And he felt sad and defeated, too, when he thought about Trina, as if he had been looking forward to something and it had been a disappointment.
At least there was music around the fire again. Theo didn’t join in, but he liked the cheerful atmosphere, and in the firelight he could watch Trina without being observed too closely. She loved the singing, and learned the words quickly, clapping along and even dancing when Kaspar held out his hand to her during a jolly tune about a pig who thought he was a horse. Maikal fell asleep at last, his head lolling against Jameth’s arm five minutes after he had insisted he was not tired at all. Jameth carried him off to the small tent, and when he returned he and Jandrin began a more mournful tune. Theo leant against one of the packs, his legs stretched out in front of him, half listening, half dozing, cradling his sore arm. The fire was warm, the music was sweet, and at least Trina wasn’t angry with him. As he dozed he realised the twins were singing a song he had not heard before. If he had, he certainly hadn’t paid attention to the words.
She’s a lovely one, my Nina,
My Nina girl of whom I sing
Too lovely for the likes of me though,
For she’s stolen the heart of a king
How I miss the sweetness of hours
How I miss the gold of her hair
I picked her a posy of flowers
And she took them, said she didn’t care
She didn’t care what the people would say
She never believed in luck anyway
But it’s all just a dream
He will make her a queen
She has stolen the heart of a king
She has stolen the heart of a king
There’s no fighting for love when your rival’s your lord
Just to think of her beauty means the wrath of his sword
She has stolen the heart of a king!
“Wait,” he said, sitting up. “That song – where did you hear it?”
Jameth shrugged, still strumming on the lute. “A travelling minstrel, I think,” he said. “It’s an old one. Twenty years at least.”
“Yes. Twenty years,” said Pralin, making one of his rare contributions to the conversation.
“It’s pretty,” said Trina, from where she sat at the fire, playing with burning sticks as she so often did. “And sad. The poor man.”
“Well, he shouldn’t have thought he could compete with a king,” said Jandrin. “Or a prince.” He winked at his brother, who winked back.
“Lucky you,” said Trina, raising her eyebrows. “No competition.”
“I don’t think it’s lucky,” said Kaspar. “If no one can compete – how will you ever know if a girl really loves you?”
“Does it matter?” laughed Jameth.
“Just … sing that last bit again,” said Theo.
The twins sang it again, and Theo listened carefully.
“What is it?” asked Kaspar. “You look as if you just realised something important.”
“I think I have,” said Theo, excitedly. “I think I know why Mother told us to go to Ahrania. I think I know who Dazmar is.”

Chapter 17
 “What are you talking about?” asked Jameth. “A song told you that?”
“Yes!” Theo scrambled up to sit closer to his brothers. “Before we left, I was talking to Mother about something, about the things I had been reading in the archives. She mentioned a friend, someone she knew before she knew Father. Someone who had doubts, too.”
“You aren’t making sense, Theo,” said Jameth. “Doubts about what?”
“Just listen,” said Theo, impatiently. “I was talking to her about how I had discovered some things that showed that the Temple faith might not have come from the West with the conquerors ...”
“But of course it did,” said Jandrin. “You can’t doubt the Temple!”
“I have, after what happened at the shrine,” said Kaspar.
“There are so many things we take for granted, Jan,” said Theo. “There are things we have been taught that I’ve discovered just aren’t true. But I’m not talking about that now. I was talking to Mother about what I had found, and she mentioned this man, a friend of hers who said he had heard some people talking in an inn somewhere about the Temple worship being false. He said that there were people who travelled around Kalathan preaching that. People from the west. From Ahrania.”
“So this is who she sent us to find? This blasphemer who says Temple worship is false?” Jandrin sounded horrified.
“Don’t be dramatic, Jan,” said Theo. “She just said he had heard of these people, not that he believed what they said.”
“But surely,” said Jameth, “surely Mother wouldn’t have been friends with a man before she married Father? He’s always telling us how pure our brides need to be!”
“Maybe she was,” said Theo, his mind racing. “Maybe he was just someone she knew, maybe they even loved each other like in the song, but then she was taken to the court and chosen by Father and that was the end of it. What if that was Dazmar?”
“You’re being ridiculous,” said Jameth. “That wound has addled your brain, what there was of it to start with.” He laughed, as if he had made a very clever joke, but only Jandrin laughed with him.
“Not really,” said Kaspar. “She said we should ask him to help us, for her sake. She knows this person. Or knew him, in the past.”
“Mother would never have been with another man before Father,” said Jandrin. “Never!”
“Really?” said Theo. “How would you know? And I’m not suggesting that there was anything improper, but she must know this person, and he’s someone who would help us for her sake, as Kaspar said. And he must be someone Father doesn’t know, or why would she say for her sake? Maybe he fled there, to Ahrania, after she met Father.”
“You think Father chased him away?” asked Kaspar, excitedly.
“I know why he left,” said Trina. “If it’s the man in the song.”
There was silence. The brothers all looked at her.
Trina shrugged. “He was a devilclaw. The song said she didn’t care what people thought, that she didn’t believe in luck.”
“You’re right,” breathed Theo. It seemed marvellously simple to him – preposterous, unbelievable almost, but marvellously simple. Mother had been friends with this devilclaw, more than friends, perhaps, before she had married Father. Father had found out and had chased him away. 
“What do you think, Pralin?” asked Kaspar.
Pralin was sitting as he often was, leaning forward towards the fire, his elbows on his knees.
“His name wasn’t Dazmar,” he said. “But the rest you’ve guessed right.”
“What?” Jandrin and Jameth spoke together.
“What are you saying, Pralin?” asked Theo. “You know about this?”
Pralin nodded slowly, stroking his grey beard. “It’s true, my lords. My lady had a friend, just a friend, mind you, nothing more. And he was a devilclaw.” He nodded to Trina. “When she was called to the court and the king chose her, he left Kalathan.  I worked for her family before I came to the palace, remember.”
“That’s right,” said Theo. “You worked for Grandfather first. So this man – he was someone from Mother’s home town? From Baskalia?”
“Yes,” Pralin nodded. “He was the son of the lord of the estate next to theirs. He would visit the house to see her brother, and they would talk in the garden. The king was not the only one who found your mother beautiful.”
“It could still be him, even if his name wasn’t Dazmar,” said Theo. “He could have changed it.”
“How would Mother know if he had changed his name?” demanded Jameth.
“Only if she kept in touch with him,” said Jandrin. “And I am sure you are not suggesting that, Theo.”
“No,” said Theo. “I don’t think she would have done that. But she may have heard news of him, from Uncle Nairan, perhaps.”
“His name was Shandar,” said Pralin. “He was a good-looking young man, and kind. No one knew he was a devilclaw until …” He shook his head and said no more. 
“Until what?” asked Kaspar. 
“Until they took him away. I never saw him after that. Your mother married the king and I moved to the palace when she did.”
Theo sat back. Shandar. It all made sense to him, even if the twins didn’t see it. Whatever Mother had found out while they were on the pilgrimage to the shrine meant that she could not trust anyone in Kalathan. The proof of her suspicions lay in a shallow grave a day’s ride away. So she had thought of the only person she knew who was far away and who might help them, someone who had no loyalty to anyone in Kalathan. This man, Dazmar. Or Shandar, or whatever his name was.
The twins were not convinced, but at least Kaspar and Trina thought he was onto something. It didn’t really make any difference now anyway. All there was to do was to ride, ride, ride, towards those mountains and then over them, to find this Dazmar and ask for his help.
The fire died down and the singing did too. As he got up to go to bed Theo remembered; Maikal was in the small tent now. Trina had slept beside Maikal since they had left the shrine. She was standing uncertainly now at the entrance to the big tent, holding the small bundle of her possessions.
“Maikal is in the small tent,” he said. “Do you want to sleep there too?”
“I don’t know,” she said. “Yes. But not … alone.”
“Pralin can stay there too, if you want.”
“Maybe you can sleep there with us,” she said. It was dark. He could not see her face.
“Me? You, me and Maikal?”
“Yes, please,” she said. “I heard wolves last night.”
“And you favour your chances with me rather than Pralin?” he smiled.
“You and your bow,” she said. “And maybe … your sword too.” He still could not see her face, but he thought he saw her smile.

Chapter 18
Trina felt so much better to be sleeping in the tent with Theo again. Maikal was beside her, and Theo beyond him – the arrangement made her feel safe. On the nights when he had been in the other tent she had slept badly, waking at every noise. The twins were more than capable of protecting her and the others, but if the volume of their snores was any indication of how soundly they slept it did not make her feel any safer to know that. And there were so many noises – owls, scurrying rodents, fluttering bats. And wolves, howling so mournfully it made her skin crawl. She had seen a wolf once, when she had been sleeping in the forest the previous summer. She and the friend she had been with had stayed up all night, keeping their fires alive, huddling in terror as the yellow eyes blinked at them only a few paces away. She knew it was odd, to have asked Theo, but then after what had happened the night before she had thought it would be all right after all. He would not take it the wrong way, not after she had slapped him. Things were clear.
Or were they? As the days passed, as the mountains crept steadily nearer, she grew accustomed to seeing his face when she woke up in the morning. She grew used to his presence, the shape of him in the dark, the sounds he made as he slept. He liked to keep a cup of water by his bed and drink it when he woke up. He snored a little if he slept on his back, but if she poked him in the ribs he would turn over and there would be peace again. His clothes were dirty, his beard was getting long, and sometimes she found she had simply forgotten that he was anyone other than this man who looked at her with respect, who wanted to know what she thought about things, who was concerned for her safety. As they covered the miles, often side by side, talking about Kalathan’s history, about the Temple and the old documents Theo had been studying, he was just Theo, not the king’s son. One evening after Maikal had fallen asleep, they lay talking quietly in the dark, and he told her about what he had found in the archives before the pilgrimage.
Trina didn’t know what to think, but the implications of what he had found out weren’t as significant an idea for her as they were for Theo. She was a devilclaw, and whether or not the belief had its origins in paganism or in the Temple scriptures made little difference to her. It was upsetting to think that the idea might have been purposely encouraged by the conquerors just to accommodate the beliefs of the locals, but whatever had happened all those years ago didn’t really matter now. People believed she was cursed, that her gentle father and mother must have committed some sin and that she was their judgement. 
Sometimes they stopped for a day, mostly to hunt for food. Trina found wild onions and herbs to add to the pot, and the food they had brought had not yet run out. Once it rained all through the night and into the next day, and they stayed where they were, catching the drips in pots, hoping the water would not seep into the tent. When it cleared up in the afternoon, she watched the brothers practice sparring with their swords, and was reminded that she owed her life to them. Theo noticed her watching them and smiled at her as he stood resting, breathing hard after putting Kaspar through his paces. 
And she was happy, Trina realised with a start one day, when Maikal had picked a bunch of wild tulips for her and thrust them into her lap before he ran off to climb a tree with Ben. It was morning, they were packing to leave, and the day promised to be warm and fine. She had washed her clothes and had a bath, and there had been meat on the fire the night before. She had survived the inevitable onset of her monthly courses, and after an exhausting few days trying to manage the bloody rags and stains on her clothes it was over at last. She had not been able to hide it from Theo but after a brief, very embarrassing conversation where she realised he knew nothing at all about this fact of life, he had been sympathetic, turning his back when she got up in the mornings without being asked. This was better than life on the streets of Kalathan City. It was rough, uncomfortable sometimes, and she had not lived in a real home so terribly long ago that she had forgotten what it was like and did not miss it. The future beyond this journey was one great unanswerable question, but for now, for these days in the forest, she felt happy.
She knew, in the back of her mind, that her sense of contentment had something to do with Theo. Not Theo, the prince of Kalathan, not the king’s son, just Theo. When Theo talked to her and shared his thoughts with her, when he spent an hour telling her a story of another chapter of Kalathan’s history that she had not known, when he spent another hour listening to her talk about her parents and her sister and the village in the Southern countryside where her grandparents lived, she felt, she knew, that he valued her. He valued her more than anyone besides her parents ever had. She told him about her years on the streets, about the people who had had mercy on her and given her work, about sleeping in the Temple loft above the sacrificial fires, about the rowdy drunken behaviour of the priests she had watched from above. She told him one day about the prison too, about the cold months in the stone cell, about the despair that had begun to overwhelm her. They were riding through a meadow of flowers that day, the mountains now looming close, and it was hard to remember what it had felt like to be there, to have almost lost hope.
“One day,” he said, shaking his head, “there will be a new Kalathan, Trina. I won’t let it carry on like that. It isn’t just. It isn’t right.”
“I believe you, Theo,” she said. And the vision of him as he looked ahead towards the peaks, his brow furrowed with determination, his bow, as always, ready on his back, stayed with her long after that day, making her heart skip a beat whenever she remembered it.
And then there was a day that they began to climb, a day when the sun was no longer pleasantly warm but uncomfortably hot, and the cool shade of the pines became a distant memory. And after that another day when they could find no water and were almost despairing when at last, they did. The grey rocks were sharp and unwelcoming, and there was the constant disconcerting knowledge that no one was at all sure of the way. West and north – it was all they had to go on, and they had no idea if their haphazard decisions would lead them where they wanted to go. But they kept going, finding animal trails and traversable passes, up and up, always north and west, hoping that over the next peak they would finally get a glimpse of the river that would guide them to Gehaz.
There was one day when everything seemed to go wrong. It was terribly hot, and by the afternoon Trina thought that if Maikal could have turned the sun off with complaining he could have done it. They were low on food and hunting was scarce, and no one felt that he had had enough to eat at lunchtime. They had been forced to turn back after half a day’s difficult riding when the way had proved impassable, and to guess, rather hopelessly, at a different route. She was sweaty and tired, and all she wanted to do was stop. But there was no shade or shelter, and Pralin had urged them on towards what looked like a green valley ahead. And it was – an almost-hidden glade with a stream and a wide flat patch to camp, and further up a real waterfall crashing into a large, amber-coloured pool. They took care of the horses and left them to rest in the shade, then all trooped to the pool, celebrating with the very last of the dried apricots and dates.
Trina took off her boots and sat on a rock with her feet in the beautiful coolness. She wished she could get in and swim too, but she had never learnt how, and besides, she couldn’t think how she could do it while preserving some kind of modesty. She already travelled in nothing but her shift on top with a green linen vest that buttoned up her front. Her skirts were long and grubby and so hot on her legs, and she envied Maikal and Ben as they swam and played in nothing but their leggings, splashing each other and laughing. Kaspar and the twins behaved much the same, stripping off their shirts and acting more like children than the others. Theo, constrained perhaps by manners his brothers did not regard, kept his shirt on, but swam across to the other side of the pool, and even Pralin waded in up to his waist, dipping his head under the water and splashing Maikal when he tried to get close.
Maikal grew tired quickly, and said he was hungry. Pralin said he would take him back to the horses, and that perhaps it was time to set up camp anyway. Trina did not want to leave yet, so she got up and picked her way along the rocks, exploring closer to the waterfall. She let the edges of her skirt trail in the water, and looked for smooth stones, feeling a little like a child again too. She found a smaller pool and knelt down to splash her face and neck, pulling out her heavy braid and running wet hands through her hair and over her hot neck. Later, perhaps, when the others were at the camp, she would return alone and bathe.
“Trina!” She heard Theo calling her and stood up.
“I’m here!” she called back. Only Theo was there, up to his waist in the pool, and she carefully picked her way back to where he was, her bare feet tender over the rocks.
“Come,” he said, holding out his hand. “Come into the water. It’s so beautifully cool.”
She felt her heart give a little lurch as she considered it. If he knew the thoughts she had been having lately he might not be holding out his hand to her like that. If he knew how good he looked to her, wet and dripping, smiling and happy, if he knew how he had filled her thoughts for the past while – but she didn't want to refuse. They were so far away from anything now that the rest of life seemed like an insubstantial dream. Here, in this desolate place, he was just a man cooling off in the water, and she wasn’t a servant or a prisoner, as he kept telling her. It was hot, and she wanted to go under the water more than anything.
She waded closer to him, laughing at how her skirt stuck to her legs and felt so heavy as it soaked up the water. Still he held out his hand. Did he want her to take it? She didn’t have to decide, after all, as she stood on a stone that gave way beneath her feet and wobbled to the side, because Theo reached out, grabbing her hand to steady her. She clasped his tightly and looked down, pretending to be trying to find her footing, not wanting her face to betray her.
“It’s all right,” he said. “I won’t let go of you. You’re safe.”
She was up to her waist now, and the sensation of the cool water over her tired, hot body was wonderful. She took another step deeper, still holding tight onto Theo’s hand.
“I really can't swim at all,” she said.
“I know. Trust me.” He put out his other hand and she took it, and he led her slowly in, walking backwards, deeper and deeper. Soon she was in up to her shoulders, and their hands were faint, pale smudges under the amber water.
“All right?” he asked.
“I think so.”
“Do you want to go under?”  
She nodded, feeling suddenly brave. She knew she trusted him not to let her fall. She took a breath and bent her knees, and let the water wash over her head, feeling her hair lift strangely as she went under. And then she was up again, the water pouring off her face, and Theo was laughing, his hands still holding hers.
She let go to push the water out of her eyes, and she saw a flash of concern in his face.
“Be careful,” he said, reaching out and taking her hand again. “We’re in deep.”
She looked down at herself, suddenly concerned that Theo might be able to see right through her clothes, but as far as she could tell it was all right. It felt strange to be so wet in her clothes, and she did wonder what she must look like – if she could see the contours of Theo’s body under his shirt, which she could, very clearly, she knew he must be able to see hers.
“I’m … all wet,” she said, stupidly.
He smiled. “Of course you are. You just went for your first swim. Do you want to go under again?”
She shook her head and they began to wade out of the deeper water towards the shallows, still hand in hand. When it was up to her knees and she felt safe she let go to run her hands over her sodden hair as he had done, and when she looked at him again, the look on his face made her think suddenly of that night when she had changed his bandages, when he had tried to kiss her.
“It suits you,” he said, softly, through a half-smile. “Being wet.” And then he stepped forward, placing his hand gently on her waist. It wasn’t like the last time. She didn’t want to slap him at all, and she could tell that he knew that. Instead, she took a step closer too. They were so close she could see when he swallowed, the little bump moving up and down on his throat. She wanted to put out her hand and touch it.
“Theo,” she said softly, daring to lift her eyes to meet his. 
The next second, his cool, soft lips were on hers, his three-weeks of beard tickling her face. She had never kissed anyone before; she had no idea what to do at all. But it was good, as water dripped from his hair off his nose onto her mouth, to feel him smile against her lips, as the roughness of his face tickled her cheeks, and she didn't want it to end. It felt as if all the longings of her lonely life had been concentrated into one moment right then, and that Theo’s lips on hers turned them all to nothing.
Then suddenly it was over. Theo let go of her side and stepped back. She found herself looking down, suddenly doubting her confidence, almost painfully aware of the significance of what had just happened.
“I’m sorry, Trina,” she heard. “I … I shouldn't have done that.”
I’m not sorry! she wanted to shout. But she said nothing. If she kissed him again, if she said anything now, what would that make her? If he thought it was a mistake, it was a mistake. It had to come from him, or she would look like nothing more than a servant trying to seduce her master. But he wasn’t smiling any more, and he was sorry, and she felt like an idiot. The single most beautiful moment in her life had turned the next second into something that felt like humiliation.
“Come,” he said, not looking at her. “Let’s go back to the shallows.”
“Wait,” she said, squeezing out her skirt, as they reached the pebbly shore. She was hurt, even a little angry, and she decided not to care if it looked as if she was trying to get something out of him. “Are you just going to say nothing now? It’s stupid, to say nothing.”
“Stupid?” He turned to her, his face as troubled as she supposed hers must be. “Was it stupid, to kiss you?”
“I don’t know, Theo. Maybe.”
“I feel stupid. I don’t know what to think.”
“I didn’t slap you this time.”
“No. You didn’t.”
“But the situation is the same. So perhaps I am stupid too.”
They stood, both still dripping, facing each other. “I am not trying to take advantage of you, Trina,” said Theo, softly. “Do you believe that?”
“I know you aren’t. But what are you trying? Do you know?” It wasn’t a challenge, just a question. And she really, really wanted to know the answer.
“I don’t know. I am … I just think about you, all the time. And I wish things were different.” He shrugged, as if he could not find the words he wanted to say next.
“You think about me?” 
“I do. All the time.”
“About … kissing me?” She smiled a little, her heart beating a little faster at his confession.
“Not just that, Trina. But yes. You are … lovely. Do you know that?” He reached out his hand and touched her cheek, gently, his face softening.
“Then why did you say you shouldn’t have done it?”
“Because, Trina, I don’t want you to be … doing your duty. I don’t want you to think you should … you know. Let me have my way.”
“Because you are a prince?”
He nodded. 
“I’m not, Theo. I wasn’t just letting you have your way.”
“You weren’t?” 
“No.” She looked at him, wondering if he believed her. “I think about you too, Theo. Even though it is absurdly foolish, considering who I am.”
“We have … become friends,” he said, smiling a little. 
“Surprisingly, yes,” she said. “I don’t really know how.”
“Friends who think about kissing each other,” he said, almost laughing. 
“It’s crazy,” said Trina, wanting to laugh too. 
“Absurdly foolish,” he grinned. 
“Ridiculous!”
“You may have been a servant, but you aren’t now, Trina.” His expression was more serious now. “If I have any authority at all in this place, any authority over you I must make you believe this – you are free to choose what you do now.”
Her answer, though she meant it to sound confident, came out in a choked, half-whisper. “If I could, Theo, I would choose you.” Oh, it was hard to say that, to admit that. She had never felt so vulnerable in her life, not even when she had faced the fat priest with his long knife, when she had got down on the road in the path of the Hazari. She had kept her heart safe all this time, trusting it to no one, and here she was, all but handing it over to a man she could never make a life with. Theo had a destiny waiting for him that could never include her, and she understood that with painful clarity.
“Perhaps you can, now,” he said, pushing the wet hair off his forehead. “I’m just a man on the run. All I own are a few horses, a bow and a sword and the clothes on my back. You can choose me, for now.”
“If I do,” she said, “you have to know it’s because I want to. Not because of anything I think you could give me. Not because of some future I’m hoping for.”
“I know,” he said. “All I can give you is my friendship, really. I can’t promise more than that.”
“I won’t ask for promises,” she said. “But I have wished that you were just a man, and that I was more than this.” She held up her wrist, the mark standing out bluer than ever against her cool skin.
In answer, he opened his arms and she stepped into them, leaning her head on his shoulder. There would be no more talk of duty, of being taken advantage of. Theo’s arms were strong around her, and she knew that she would never forget this moment as long as she lived, no matter how it all turned out. She had never imagined that anything like this would be part of her future; even now it was something she felt she had stolen, something meant for someone other than her. But there was no reason she could find to refuse this small window of happiness, even if there was no way that she could see it ending happily. The water still ran in rivulets down her face, weighing down her clothes, but she felt, perhaps for the first time since Father had died and she had watched her mother and sister leaving the city, that there was somewhere in the world that she belonged.

Chapter 19
Travelling through the mountains was not like travelling through the forest. The days were hot and the nights cool enough that they still needed the quilts and the furs. They were all dusty, sunburned and wearier than ever, even though they were covering less distance. Theo wished, as he had so many times, that they just knew the way, that there was a way to know if they were even heading in the right direction. And always in the back of his mind there was the thought that there could be a sixth Hazari, or another whole pack of them, and even as the distance between them and the city increased, he never felt entirely safe.
But there was Trina, and every day he woke either to the sight of her eyes on him from across the tent, or even better, a chance to watch her as she slept. If he woke first, he would stay as still as he could, watching her breathe, her long eyelashes soft against her cheek, her hair spread every which way around her face, the quilt pulled up to her chin, and daydream for a moment that he was, as he had said, just a man. She had a faint scattering of freckles around her nose and under her eyes, and her forehead was always creased, just slightly, as she drifted slowly from sleep to wakefulness. He had not said it to her, but he had been thinking about that word, love, because there seemed to be no other word that fit. The feeling, now that it had settled, was not what he had expected. He had wondered what it would be like to feel love for a woman, but he realised that he had been imagining admiration more than what it had turned out to be. He admired Trina very much; she impressed him and delighted him with something new almost every hour, and even in her dull clothes and lack of any adornment he loved to look at her. Since the day in the pool, since he had kissed her and held her and told her what he had been thinking, she seemed to him to be prettier than she had been before. But it was more than that, he discovered. It was not only her that he valued, it was that intangible, delicate something that existed in the space between them. He had not anticipated the knowing. There was something in the scriptures about it, about a man knowing his wife, and he had been taught that it referred to the intimacy of marriage, but he and Trina had barely kissed and already there was this strange sense of connection, of understanding, that he could not get his mind around. 
I am yours, he thought, as he rode behind her over the grey rocks, and as their eyes met, many times a day, over a campfire or a pheasant to be plucked, over Maikal’s sleeping body at night. I am yours, and you are mine. This was the knowledge that had settled in his mind, without his even noticing it, like a veil tossed in the air to land gently over the bowed head of a bride.
She had said it was absurdly foolish, and of course she was right. There were laws, in Kalathan, about marriage for the king’s heirs. He could never marry anyone like her, if that was what he wanted one day, even if she had no mark. There had never, as far as he knew, been an exception to those laws. Noblemen, especially royal ones, married noblewomen, or the daughters of generals or Temple fatirs. There had been a few foreign princesses from Mandaria or Ahrania joining the royal family in the days before the kings of Kalathan had begun to isolate themselves, but never for the king’s heirs. His mind spun around the problem, only tangling it up tighter than before. If they ever got home safely, he could offer Trina nothing. Perhaps a house on an estate and a life as a king’s mistress, hidden from the world and isolated from everyone. That was not a life Trina would accept; he had no doubt of that, and it was not a life he would ever want to offer any woman anyway. She had her pride, he knew; she had hope for a life beyond all this, and when they got home there could be a pardon, some money, whatever it took to help her to achieve that. But because he was the king’s son, he could not offer her himself beyond this journey unless he offered her humiliation at the same time.
“Fifty kronas for your thoughts, brother.” Jandrin and Jameth rode up beside him as they crossed a flat, open area strewn with sharp rocks and scrubby bushes. He was not even sure which one had spoken.
“They are worth more than that,” he said, wiping the sweat off his brow. He had found an old sack in one of the packs and ripped it up into a sort of turban to keep the worst of the sun off his eyes. It helped, he supposed, but it was odd to think what he must look like. A few weeks ago he had been clean-shaven, dressed in a silk jacket and soft-soled boots, his favourite circlet on clean, sweet-smelling hair. Now he thought he must look like a hunter or a trapper, perhaps the servant of a trader or even a farmer. He was thinner, too, tired all the time, and his belly ached constantly because of their dull diet of game and the last scraps of their rice.
“Look at this,” said Jan, handing Theo something across the space between their horses. He took it, squinting in the bright light.
“An arrow,” he said, turning it over. It was fresh, the flights neatly-trimmed feathers, the shaft a stiff, strong red-coloured reed he did not recognise.
“This place is not unpopulated,” said Jameth, looking around, as if he expected to see the owner of the arrow appear from behind one of the rocks.
“No.” Theo realised with a sinking feeling that once again his ignorance was being shown up. He had not known that these mountains were inhabited. If he had ever studied it, he did not remember.
“We can ask Ben if he remembers his Geography again,” joked Jandrin.
“Let’s not worry him,” said Theo. He lifted the arrow closer to his face. “Did you notice this?” he asked. “It looks like writing.”
Jandrin took the arrow back and squinted at it. “It’s not Kalath,” he said.
“That doesn’t mean much. Roughly one out of every ten people in Kalathan don’t speak Kalath at all.” said Theo.
“What? I didn’t know that,” said Jameth. “Surely they all go to school?”
“They are meant to,” said Theo. “I heard something about it in the council once, that there are tribes within our borders that are hard to reach. No one knows how many. They keep to themselves.”
“I’ll bet they don’t pay tax either,” said Jandrin. “Someone should do something about that.”
“Are we sure we are still in Kalathan?” asked Jameth. “We might have gone too far west.”
“We would have reached the river,” said Theo. “We’re still in Kalathan.”
“If we meet one of your tribes, they won’t recognise us. They might not even care if they did,” said Jandrin.
“We’d better be on our guard,” said Theo, handing the arrow back to Jandrin. “Have your weapons ready.” The way narrowed now, as the party made their way along a track towards what looked like a way through. Theo squinted ahead, trying to see what was ahead, but the sun reflected so brightly on the ashy landscape that he could not make anything out. He felt unsettled and nervous, having seen that arrow. It had been so long since they had seen anyone at all – no one since the Hazari in the forest.
Kaspar was on first watch, and as Theo lay down on his bed, weariness washing over him, he tried not to think about the fact that in a couple of hours he would be woken to do his turn. Maikal fell asleep more quickly than usual, and when he heard the boy’s breathing change, he reached out for Trina’s hand which he knew waited for him.
“You all right?” he asked. Her hand was dry, dirty and dusty as his must be too. There was no water to spare for washing hands.
“Just thirsty,” she whispered, threading her fingers through his.
“We must find water tomorrow,” he said. “Even if it’s out of our way.”
“The poor horses,” she said.
“Do you ever think we might not make it? To Ahrania?”
“Today was the first time. It hasn’t been this hard before.”
He squeezed her hand. “We are so fragile, aren’t we? A few days without water...”
“Maybe it’s time to pray again.”
“You still do that?”
“Sometimes.”
“The God of the Temple would not be happy with me now.”
“Why not?”
“We haven’t been doing the sword ceremony. We haven’t acknowledged him in this at all. And we are weak. He is a God of the strong.”
“Well, I pray to a God who cares about the weak. If he isn’t there, I have lost nothing. And if he is – then so far he has protected me.”
He closed his eyes, his arm still resting over Maikal’s sleeping body, his hand still in hers. “Pray then, Trina. We need all the help we can get.”
What was it, he thought, about holding hands? It was such a simple thing. Trina’s hand in his was solidarity, connection, even if she was the last person on earth he would ever have expected to have been that to him. It made him feel less alone, to hold her hand. And it was something he could give her: a gesture of affection in the uncertainty and precariousness of this journey, in the uncertainty and precariousness of her whole life, he supposed. They fell asleep quickly, one after the other, their fingers still locked together.
When he woke he thought it was Kaspar, waking him for his turn to watch. But it was a shout he heard, not a soft call. He sprang to his feet, disoriented for a second, and even as his reflexes kicked in and he picked up his bow, his first thought was still how thirsty he was.
He emerged from the tent to find an arc of red-sheathed arrows pointing at him, each held by a shadowy long-haired figure. One of them shouted at him, words he did not understand, but he assumed he was being ordered to drop his bow. He laid it slowly on the ground, careful not to move too suddenly.  There was too much light for the middle of the night – behind the archers, he realised, was another ring of torch-bearers, all, it seemed, with knives in their free hands. Kaspar was beside him, his hands raised in surrender, his sword and bow lying on the ground in front of him. In a moment the twins and Pralin had emerged from the other tent, dropping their weapons too as they realised what was happening.
“We mean you no harm,” said Theo, resisting the urge to rub his tired, dry eyes to make sure that what he was seeing was real. These people were dark-haired, with the almond-shaped eyes of the northern tribes of Kalathan. Yet they were nothing like the people he knew of, people like little Uka – these were warriors, both men and women in long, pale shirts and trousers, with crude leather chest armour and thonged sandals on their feet. Ropes of long, narrow braids hung around the faces of the men; the two women in the party of archers who he could see wore long braids like Trina’s.
He looked around, trying to work out who was the leader, hoping Trina would have the sense to stay in the tent and keep Maikal in there with her. A stocky man stepped forward; in the light of the torches and under his beard and mass of braids it was impossible to tell his age. The man spoke, not a shout this time, but again, Theo understood nothing.
“We are Kalath,” said Theo, trying hard not to sound threatening. “Kalath?”
The man lowered his bow, looking at his companions. There were about nine or ten, Theo counted. Too many for them to overpower if it was necessary. “Kalath,” said the man to Theo, shaking his head.
“What do they want, Theo?” asked Jandrin.
“I don’t know,” he answered, impatiently. “Unless you understand whatever language that was.”
“Don’t they know who we are?” asked Jameth. “Let’s show them our rings!”
“No, Jay,” hissed Theo. “Why should they recognise us or know anything about seal rings? Just be quiet.”
The twins obeyed, each standing with an arm around Ben, who had emerged from the tent and now stared wide-eyed at the bows aimed straight at him.
The leader said something to some of the torch bearers, who stepped forward at his command, gathering up the weapons that lay on the ground. Theo’s heart sank – if they lost their weapons, they would not be able to find food, let alone defend themselves. The strangers muttered softly as they picked up the swords and bows, examining them and commenting to each other. The archers did not move and the arrows remained fixed. But as soon as the weapons were gathered up, and the tents had been investigated, Trina now emerging from the tent with Maikal, they were lowered.
The leader faced Theo, his bow still in his hands. He spoke, and although the words were strange Theo could guess something of what they meant. He tried to reply, acting out a journey, saying “Ahrania” and pointing north. He tried to mime someone attacking him, not very successfully, he thought, judging by the faces.
After he had done what he could, the leader half-turned to speak to his companions. There was some conversation, some wild gesturing, some pointing at Theo and staring at the others. Then he turned back to face Theo, put his hand on his chest and said his name. “Dastar.” Then gesturing to all of his companions: “Issyaks.”
“Issyaks,” repeated Theo. He had never heard of any Issyaks. He pointed to himself and said his name. There seemed no point in trying to communicate more than that. “Kalathan?” he asked, hoping it meant something. He knelt down and patted the ground. “Kalathan?”
Dastar nodded. “Kalathan,” he said. Then he stepped forward to take Theo’s arm, gesturing again, and pointing at Kaspar too. At first Theo could not understand what he was trying to say, but when he did his heart sank, again.
“What is it?” asked Trina. “What does he want?”
Theo didn’t answer her, shaking his head at Dastar. “No,” he said. “Please. Don’t leave them here alone.”
“Alone?” asked Jandrin. Theo could hear Maikal begin to whimper behind him.
“They want Kaspar and me to go with them,” he said. “And for the rest of you to stay here.”
“No, Theo!” said Jandrin, stepping forward. Immediately, the archers stepped towards him, bows up.
“Jan!” cried Ben, pulling him back.
But Dastar was adamant. He said something that had to mean “Come!” at Theo, pulling at his arm. One of the torchbearers pocketed his knife and stepped towards Kaspar.
Theo took a deep breath, all his efforts focussed on staying calm, on not frightening the boys. He knew they had no choice but to do what the Issyaks wanted and go with them. What that meant, he had no idea. Their intentions were anyone’s guess.
He laid his hand over Dastar’s which clutched tightly at his arm, slowly pushing it away. “We will come,” he said, nodding slowly. “We will come.”

Chapter 20
Trina woke with a start. She thought for a second that she was still in the tent in the desolate mountain, still thirsty, still desperately worried for Theo and Kaspar. But she was not – she was not in the tent at all. The structure she had slept in was something between a hut and a tent, a yarka, she had learnt. It was tall enough to stand up in, roughly circular, built around a sparse wooden frame, the walls a patchwork of skins and hides. She lay back on the surprisingly comfortable bed that the women of this particular yarka had set up for her the night before. It was these women who were her sleeping companions now, not Theo and Maikal. They were somewhere else, with the other men.
It was still dark, and quiet outside, the sound of the wind lifting the tough leather roof all she could hear. She closed her eyes again, relieved that those few days were over, that Theo’s brief kiss on her forehead as he left had not been his last. “If we don’t return in four days, turn back,” he had whispered. “Find water, and go back to the city.  Tell the twins.” She had nodded blindly as he had knelt down to embrace Maikal. “Look after everyone, Maikal,” he had said, grinning. “The twins might get scared. Tell them I’ll be back as soon as I can, all right?” Maikal had been comforted, and had not cried as the Issyaks, bundling all their weapons up in a clanking pile on one of the packhorses, had tied Theo’s and Kaspar’s wrists together and led them away into the darkness. How they had endured the rest of that night, she did not know. The water the Issyaks had left them, the two bulging bags placed at their feet by one of the women, had given them hope. If these people intended to kill them, they would not have given them water. She had drunk her cupful in the dark, her hands shaking, praying over and over in her head: God, please help them, realising as she did so that she was perhaps, for the first time in her life, praying for someone other than herself.
The days had dragged by, one, then two, and on the second night she and the twins and Pralin had waited for the boys to fall asleep and tried to decide what to do. They had, after much searching, found a spring an hour’s walk away, and Pralin had managed, incredibly, to make a snare out of a piece of string and a sack and had caught more than a few of the fat, dusty-brown rodents that hid in the crevices of the rocks. The twins had spent half a day going back the way they came to find the thicket of berry bushes they had passed on the way and had returned with a sack of greenish-pink berries, only just digestible. Trina’s gut ached constantly, and the smell of the rodents cooking over the fire made her want to be sick.
Theo had said to turn back, and the twins were all for doing exactly as he had said, but Trina disagreed. Her opinion was that they had water, they could find food for a little longer, and that they could stay and wait for the others to return. And if they did not return soon, they should move on and find them, not give up and leave like cowards. It had ended up in a shouting match, Jan and Jay going on and on about obeying Theo’s wishes, Trina feeling madder and madder every second that they thought so little of him that they were not prepared to risk anything to go out there to find him. Then Jandrin had accused her of trying to entrap Theo. They had all seen the kiss he had given her, and they had made whatever suppositions they wanted to, she supposed. She would have liked to slap the self-righteous glares off both their faces, but she took a deep breath and held her chin high.
“I am not doing any such thing,” she said, knowing what it must look like but still angry at what they had assumed. “Theo is free to do whatever he chooses. I have asked nothing of him.”
“You are playing on his sympathy,” smirked Jandrin. “You don’t really think he’s going to marry you, do you? There are laws against that, you know, and against what is probably going on in that tent at night.”
Their laughter was worse than the accusation. She had closed her eyes and reminded herself of the truth. Theo had done nothing more than hold her hand at night, but it was pointless trying to defend herself. But still, perhaps the whole argument was pointless anyway, because Theo might be dead and then she would never see him again. One of these two fools would be the next king, and Kalathan would be poorer for it.
But in the morning Theo was back, riding unbound with one of the Issyaks beside him. “It’s all right!” he had shouted as he had sighted them from the narrow path above them that led over the next rise. “It’s all right!”
And now here she was, a guest of the Issyaks, as Theo and Kaspar had been. It had taken that long for the tribe to find someone to translate, for a crippled old woman from a neighbouring tribe who had once lived in the south to be found and brought to their camp, for the stories to be told and the absence of evil intentions revealed. The Issyaks were just fiercely private, proud of their independent existence. They were aware that they lived in Kalathan and were under the authority of the king, but in practice they had, for generations, been free to live as they pleased. Recently, two of their young men, on a market trip to Gehaz, had been press-ganged into the army, and since then they had been extra cautious, extra suspicious of strangers and intruders in their mountain home. Their camp was on a green plateau, the grass beginning to yellow now as the summer dried it out, their goats and horses getting fat on the rich grazing. They bred horses and traded them for food and tools in Gehaz, moving around every year as they followed the best grass.
The other women in the yarka began to stir, and Trina sat up, eager to begin the day, to find out what would happen next. Gehaz was only ten miles away. Ahrania was near – in just a few days the journey, for now, could be over. She was not at all sure how she felt about that, but still, she didn’t enjoy the uncertainty. If they were going to leave, she wanted to know. And she wanted to see Theo. She had missed him, longed for him, even begun to imagine having to grieve for him if he did not return. That was over; God had (surprisingly) answered her prayer again, and kept him safe.
The women brought hot stones from outside, placing them in a hollow in the middle of the yarka, which Trina saw now was lined with clay. One of the others brought water, and poured it, steaming, over the stones. They washed together, removing their clothes and soaping themselves with greyish suds from a stone bowl they offered her, speaking all the time in their strange sing-song language. Trina did what they did, even washing her hair, remembering the last time she had done so, in the palace, with an ivory comb carved with elephants. That bath had smelt like jasmine and roses; this one smelt strongly of lye and ash, but the result was the same – she was deliciously clean afterwards, and she felt like a little girl again, watching the other women giggle and braid their hair.
And later there was food: meat that did not make her want to be sick, bread, real bread baked in a pot in the fire, and the refreshing, cool bitterness of goat’s milk and cheese. And Theo, sweet-smelling and clean-shaven, embracing her shamelessly in front of everyone, smelling faintly of woodsmoke but mainly, too, of soap.
“We’re all right,” he said, smiling at her. “Gehaz is close, Ahrania is close, and we are all right!”
“Look at you,” she said, touching his smooth cheek. “Fit for a palace now!” But her heart sank a little as she said it. As clean as she was, she would never be fit for a palace.
They rode away the same day, heading for Gehaz. Kaspar talked non-stop, telling them all every detail of his days with the Issyaks. He was fascinated with the language and had even learnt a little, although Jandrin and Jameth said he was wasting his time; that the language of an isolated tribe was hardly useful to anyone. Trina said nothing, still sore about the way they had spoken to her on the mountain. Theo might think they were all in this together, that they were equals, but she knew that was not true. She was just a vaguely interesting anomaly to them, a devilclaw who turned out useful every now and then, but who clearly had ambitions beyond her status in life. Let them think that, she thought. They were arrogant, entitled asses sometimes, both of them, and although they had almost died together they would never think of her as an equal, not the way Theo and probably Kaspar did. She knew the truth. No matter what happened, Theo would never think that of her, and that was all that really mattered.
Late in the afternoon, after a few hours of downhill riding, the town was in sight. It was almost a jarring sight, to see houses and smoke, to see the twisted spire of the Temple rising above the other roofs, to see people on the roads as they approached. As they left the narrow mountain path and joined another heading towards the town, they passed an old man with a donkey, his saddlebags laden with goods, heading perhaps for one of the small villages in the valley.
The man stopped and stared at the sight of them, Theo in front on his tall charger, bow as usual on his back, the twins with their golden hair, swords glinting at their sides, the pack horses still laden with their possessions. Theo greeted him as they rode past, and Trina realised with a start that their original plan to just ride into Gehaz was not a good one.
“Theo,” she said, riding up beside him. The man continued to stare as they carried on towards the town. “I can’t believe we have been so stupid. We can’t all go into Gehaz like this. We’re too conspicuous.”
Her misgivings led to a conference at the side of the road. At first Theo and the twins didn’t agree, but all Trina had to do to convince them was to appeal to Pralin, who nodded his head earnestly. “I wasn’t going to say anything, my lords, but Trina is right,” he said. “The Issyaks did not recognise you but the people in Gehaz might. At any rate they will know you are nobility. You should put away the swords and try not to speak too much.”
“I suppose it is best to stay … inconspicuous,” said Theo. “I didn’t think we looked like anyone special anymore, though, after all that travelling. What do you suggest, Pralin?”
“We should split up,” said Pralin. “Decide on a meeting place and a time to meet tomorrow.”
“And there are soldiers around, remember,” said Kaspar. “We need to be careful not to be press-ganged, like those Issyaks were.”
The twins laughed at the irony, but Theo was serious. “You’re right, Kas. We were so set on making it to Gehaz that we didn’t think about the dangers of being here. And we cannot reveal our true identities. It’s too dangerous – do you hear that, everyone?” He looked sternly at the twins. “Not under any circumstances.”
An hour later, the groups had been divided, and Trina watched as first Pralin, Ben and Jameth rode off together, Jameth’s too-obvious hair hidden under a hood. A little later Theo and Kaspar rode away together. Again, she had to watch Theo ride away from her, and although this time was different she still felt that fear, that pull at her heart at the separation from him. It won’t be the last time, she told herself, as she sat by the side of the road with Maikal while they waited for time to pass until they could leave, playing a game with the smooth stones he had found at the mountain pool. They took turns, throwing them into the air and trying to pick up more. There would most likely be a day when Theo rode away to go back to being a prince, and she would not be able to follow. She might as well get used to it. She thought, almost longingly, of the forest and the mountains behind them. Things were unlikely ever to be so simple again.
Jandrin leant against a rock, chewing on a piece of grass. She would have been landed with Jandrin, out of all of them. She had to pretend to be his wife, too. She didn’t care what he thought of her, but still, it was not a pleasant prospect.
“So, wife,” he said, the grass still hanging out of the side of his mouth, a smile that was more like a smirk on his face. He jangled the coins in his pocket, coins she had gaped at when Theo had brought them out. Money had meant nothing on their journey until now, but right now Jan had a pocketful of gold that would buy her a farm near the city if it was hers. Did he even know that? She looked up at him, doubting very much that he did. “We’re going to find ourselves a cozy little inn somewhere, are we?”
He winked at her, but she looked back at him blankly. “You are going to keep your mouth shut and let me do the talking,” she said. “And you’re going to find something to put over your head. No one here has hair like that.”
“Maikal does,” he said. “I’m supposed to be his father, aren’t I?”
“I’ve got a cap,” said Maikal, pulling on the skin-and-hide cap that the Issyak children had given him.
Jandrin sighed, getting up to rummage in the packs. “It had better be a good inn,” he said. He got distracted looking for a head-covering and picked up his lute instead, strumming it fondly. “With baths and soft beds and an actual roof over our heads. Maybe there will be music! It’s been so long since I’ve played for anyone other than all of you.”
“We can’t be fussy,” said Trina, wondering if they could leave yet. “And we need to stay out of sight. You can’t be entertaining people at inns, Jan.”
“Oh, it’s Jan, now, is it?” He turned, facing her and waving his lute in her direction. “We’re not out in the sticks any more, girl. Maybe we need to go back to proper address.”
“When you are back in your palace, Jan,” said Trina, as sweetly as she could, “You can find as many women as you like to call you their lord. Until then, you need me to get you through this city without being revealed as a prince and then murdered in your bed by an assassin. So I’ll keep calling you by your name. And you are welcome to keep calling me by mine.”
“Ooh,” said Jandrin, hand over his heart in mock surprise. “She bites! Theo disappears, and suddenly her true colours emerge!”
Trina sighed and began to get up. “Come on Maikal,” she said. “Time to get moving. Your pretend father and I need to get you to a real bed tonight. How does that sound?”
Maikal shrugged as he put away his stones in his pocket. “I like tents,” he said. “And yarkas.”
“Remember,” said Trina, leaning down to look him in the eye. “Don’t talk unless you have to. Your name is a secret, remember? I’m going to call you … Boras!”
“Boras!” laughed Maikal. “That’s my cat’s name!”
“I know,” smiled Trina. “So you won’t forget. You must call Jandrin Father, remember? Don’t say his name.”
“What are you going to call him?” asked Maikal, as Jan helped him onto his pony. “You can’t call him Father.”
“Hmm,” said Trina, tapping her chin. “I think I will call him … Pitka. What do you think of that?”
Maikal laughed and laughed, still chuckling to himself as they entered the gates of the town. Jandrin scowled and sulked, but Trina didn’t mind at all. Pitka was the name of the Queen’s pet peacock.

Chapter 21
Trina paced up and down the small patch of grass near the ferry dock on the other side of the river from Gehaz, her anxiety increasing with every minute that passed. She had endured a night in an inn with Jandrin, fielding his accusations and insults and trying to hide her frustration from Maikal, and hoped sincerely that she would not have to do that again. He had claimed the bed and although she did not care about sleeping on the floor, he had snored so loudly that she hadn’t managed to sleep much anyway. Ben, Pralin and Jameth had met them on the other side of the river as they had planned, and now they waited, at the beginning of the narrow road to the last mountain pass between Kalathan and Ahrania, for Theo and Kaspar to appear. Ferry after ferry drifted up to the dock, offloading people and goods on their way to the villages on this side of the river, but no Theo or Kaspar. It was getting late; it was hours past the meeting time already and there was no sign of them.
“Perhaps I can go back,” she said, trying to sound breezy so as not to worry Ben and Maikal. “Perhaps they are lost, or have lost their money and can’t pay the ferryman …”
“Relax, Trina,” said Jandrin, from where he sat on the grass, leaning against the signpost to the pass. “There’s plenty of time. They’ll be here.”
Maikal and Ben spotted a group of trees to climb and ran off. “How can you be so sure?” asked Trina, as soon as they were out of earshot. “Theo wouldn’t be late if he could help it. I think something must have happened to them.”
“And if it has, what could you do about it?” Jandrin folded his arms and stared up at Trina. “Stop pacing around like a madwoman and get us something to eat. I’m starving.”
“Get it yourself,” fumed Trina. “I am not your servant!” Even as she said it, she regretted it. She had carefully avoided antagonizing him any more than she had to but now she could see she had made him angry.
“Actually, you are,” he said, standing up. “You, Trina, are my father’s subject and servant. Don’t think that you can stand there and give me orders!”
“I don’t intend to offend you, Jandrin,” she said, trying to stay calm. “But I am not your servant. Your father considered me nothing more than meat for a sacrifice. As far as he is concerned I am dead. Theo told me I was free to choose …”
“Oh did he?” asked Jandrin, hands on his hips. “What else has he told you? That your cleverness makes up for this?” He grabbed her arm and turned her wrist to show the mark. “You may be clever enough to have fooled my brother, but you are a devilclaw and nothing can change that. God cursed you, Trina, you should remember that and be humble. You should be happy to be our servant!”
“Don’t touch me!” hissed Trina, wrenching her arm away from him. “I am not cursed. I don’t believe that and neither does Theo!”
“Think about it,” said Jandrin. “We left the palace with you two devilclaws tagging along, and since then we haven’t exactly been blessed with good fortune. Maybe it’s time, Trina, for you to choose to leave. We don’t need you anymore. I’m sure you could find some work in Gehaz.” He waved his hand dismissively towards the town.
“Really?” Trina was incredulous. “An assassination attempt is bad luck? And it’s all my fault?”
“I rather think we have had good luck,” said Jameth. Both Trina and Jandrin turned to look at him from where he sat on one of the packs with Pralin, near the horses who were pulling contentedly at the thick grass. “Trina saved our sorry behinds in the forest that day. The Issyaks found us when we were running out of food and water and we are still alive, all of us. I’d say that’s more like good luck. If Theo thinks it’s not true about devilclaws being cursed, I think I might agree with him.”
Jandrin stared at his brother in shock, Trina too. Jameth never contradicted Jandrin. At least Trina had never heard him do it.
“Thank you, Jameth,” she said. “I appreciate your saying that.” She turned back to Jandrin. “We are wasting time arguing, Jan. I’m worried about Theo and Kaspar. Surely you are too?”
Jandrin shrugged again, walking over to the packs, pulling a hunk of bread out of a bag and taking a bite. “Not really. Maybe they will appear tomorrow. We can camp out here until they do.”
Jameth looked up at the sun, which was beginning to sink in the sky. “Perhaps we do need to do something,” he said. “It is unlike Theo to be late.”
“Fine,” said Jandrin, swallowing his bread. “You two go back across the river and see if you can find them. I’ll stay here with Pralin and the boys and set up camp. It looks as if we will be here for the night, even if they appear on the next ferry.” He pointed at Trina with his half-eaten piece of bread. “But she’s still a devilclaw, Jay. Don’t let her get you into more trouble.”
“If it wasn’t for me you would be in nothing but trouble,” said Trina.
“You fuss like a grandmother,” he said.
“And you snore like a bear. I feel sorry for your wife one day, having to put up with that!”
“Children, children,” said Jameth, taking Trina’s arm. “Enough. Let’s go and find Theo and Kaspar.”
“Yes,” said Trina, feeling a little ashamed of herself. She didn’t want to let Jandrin get to her so easily, but she had just endured twenty-four hours of him and she was worried and anxious. Without Theo there it was harder to restrain herself. As she walked off towards the ferry with Jameth she felt for the silver dagger in her pocket, where she always kept it. At last she was doing something. As they made their way down the low hill, Jameth rummaging in his pocket for coins to pay for the ride, the possibilities flew through her mind, and she chided herself for being so petty. Theo and Kaspar must be in trouble. They had to find them.
When their ferry docked on the other side of the river Trina could tell something was going on. People clustered in groups, talking excitedly. “What is it?” Jameth asked the ferryman, pulling the hat that covered his hair lower over his ears against the breeze that had come up. Evening was approaching.
“They say the king is here, in Gehaz,” said the ferryman. “I don’t believe it, myself.”
“Not the king, surely?” Trina’s heart sank. She didn’t believe it either, but she knew what it meant. Theo had been discovered, somehow, and mistaken for the king.
“That’s what I said,” said the ferryman, as Jameth and Trina paid him. “The king would never come here. He never has and why should he? We are nothing to the likes of him!”
“Not nothing,” said Jameth. “I am sure he cares about all the citizens of Kalathan, very much!”
Trina was surprised at his earnestness but concerned too. They had agreed that she would do the talking, that Jameth would take care not to bring attention to himself. “You talk funny,” said the ferryman, staring quizzically at him. “You’re not from around here, are you?”
“No,” said Trina, hurriedly, trying to imitate the odd accent of the townspeople as well as she could. “He’s not. Where was the king seen? Do you know?”
“In the town square,” said the ferryman. “But it’s not him, I told you. It can’t be.”
Trina and Jameth hurried off. “Do you think Father is really here?” asked Jameth, as they walked as quickly as they could towards the square. Trina knew where it was: she and Pralin had been there only that morning to get supplies for the rest of the journey. “I wonder how he got here so fast?”
“No, Jameth,” said Trina. “Not your father. But probably someone who looks very much like him.”
“Who?”
Trina took a deep breath and pushed him forward. “Theo, Jameth. Theo has somehow got himself recognised.”
As they approached the square the crowd increased in size. And when they finally reached the open area, Trina saw what she had both been dreading and hoping for. Theo, and Kaspar, standing on a raised platform that only that morning had held a band of second-rate musicians entertaining the crowd. She pushed forward until she reached the front, Jameth following close behind her. Theo was, it seemed, deep in conversation with a stocky grey-haired man in a dark blue jacket. He had to be the town sheriff, thought Trina, noticing the sword emblem on the front of the jacket, or someone similar. There was a priest on the platform, too, a lanky older man who stood tall in his long red robe, looking down his nose, Trina thought, at the sheriff. And there was another group on the platform too: three rough-looking men, all unshaven and dressed in plain, none-too-clean clothes. And sitting down, heads between their knees, were two young boys, probably younger than Kaspar, their hands bound in front of them.
As they reached the front of the crowd surrounding the platform, Jameth started forward. “Theo! Kaspar!” he said, excitedly.
“No!” Trina pulled him back by his sleeve. She looked around anxiously, hoping no one had noticed him. “No, Jay! Wait until we know what’s happening.”
“But my lord,” one of the rough men was saying now, to Theo and the sheriff. “We have our orders. King’s orders, we were told. We can’t just let them go. The army needs men, and if there aren’t enough volunteers then this is what must be done.”
“That suits you, doesn’t it?” Theo was angry. “You just sail your boat up and down the river, taking boys away from their mothers, then collect your price. Why aren’t you joining the army yourself instead of stealing children?”
“Bad foot, my lord,” said the man, casually lifting up a dirty boot. “I would if I could, honest. I’m doing my bit, my lord, for Kalathan.”
“These boys are underage,” said Theo, firmly. “I won’t allow you to take them on to your boat.”
“A press gang,” whispered Trina to herself, realising what had happened. Theo had seen these young boys being abducted and had intervened. Despite the risk to their own safety, he had not been able to stop himself. What a strange mix of impulsiveness and restraint he was, she thought. His impulsiveness had saved her life, and she loved him for the deep convictions he could not help acting on. But this was a problem. She looked at the boys on the platform, one of whom was looking up at Theo now, his face full of fear, and hope too.
“I will lose my boat, my lord, if I go back to the city empty-handed,” said the gang leader. “All my livelihood! I have a family to feed!”
Theo was conflicted, she could see. But he would not give in. “I will not tolerate this in Kalathan,” he said. “This is not how our country defends itself, by sending boys to war. My father, if he knew, would never approve.”
Yet he approves of sacrificing girls to spirits, thought Trina. She wondered if Theo was thinking that too.
“All respect, my lord,” said the priest. “The sheriff said you showed him your seal ring. May I see it?”
“I am who I say I am,” said Theo, holding out his hand to the priest. “You need not doubt me.”
The priest was silent, examining the ring and scratching his chin. “You have a seal ring,” he said. “That proves nothing. And your brother has no ring.”
“He is not yet eighteen,” said Theo, dropping his hand. “My other brothers …” He stopped, clearly undecided about how much to say.
The priest raised his eyebrows. He was sceptical, and Trina did not blame him.
“Why would I interfere, then?” asked Theo. “What reason would I possibly have for claiming to be the son of the king if I was not?”
The priest shook his head. “If you are asking these men to release the boys—”
Theo folded his arms. “Then tell me this, brother,” he said. When he spoke Trina could not understand what he was saying. She thought at first that she was not hearing him right, but when she saw the priest’s face she understood what he was doing. He was speaking the Old Tongue, the language of the Temple, of the conquerors and the Scriptures. The priest stepped back slightly.
“My lord,” he said again. “Forgive me. Only a priest …”
“And a son of the king could know that. And I am no priest.” He lifted his head, addressing the rest of the crowd. “People of Gehaz! This practice of kidnapping your young men and hauling them off to war is unjust. I do not allow it, and neither does my father.”
The crowd cheered. Was there a pause there, in what Theo had said? Trina wondered. A slight hesitation?
“These boys will be released, together with every man on your boat.” He turned to the gang leader as he said this. The man turned red, his eyes bulging with rage.
“No!” he said. “I will be ruined! I cannot return to the city with nothing, my lord!”
“We will speak after this,” said Theo, calmly. “I am certain we can come to an agreement.” The sheriff was crouching down now, untying the ropes from the boys’ wrists. Trina heard a sob from next to her, and turned to see a woman standing, a dark-coloured scarf over her head, her hand over her mouth, her eyes fixed on the boys. When they were free, they climbed stiffly down the platform into her embrace.
“My sons,” she said, looking up to Theo. “Thank you, my lord. These are my only sons, and I am a widow. I thank you.”
“Kalathan thanks you,” said Theo, stepping off the platform and clasping the woman’s hands. “You have raised two brave young men, who were prepared to fight for Kalathan if they had to. They were not afraid for themselves, only for you.” Then he turned to the boys. “When you are old enough, and you have made provision for your mother, perhaps you will travel to the city and volunteer for the army. Kalathan needs men; I cannot deny it. But it will not be through practices like these that our need is supplied.”
A shout rose up among the people. Trina heard them chanting “Long live Kalathan! Long live the king!” Theo moved quickly back onto the platform so as not to be mobbed. His eyes darted around and met Trina’s. She saw the quick recognition, a look of relief as he saw Jameth too and gave them a brief nod, but he did not let his eyes linger. He spoke quietly to the sheriff again.
“I accept your hospitality,” she heard him say. “I will be pleased to spend the night at your home, as soon as I have made sure that my wishes have been carried out.” He whispered something to Kaspar, who was shouldering the bags that held their possessions. As the sheriff protested, ordering one of his men to take the bags, Kaspar looked in her direction and smiled too. Theo spoke to the press-gang man briefly, handing him something that made him nod and walk away with his companions, clearly not happy but apparently satisfied enough not to make more of a fuss. Gold, Trina assumed. Everyone had a price, and the son of a king was likely to be able to meet it.
Trina stepped back into the crowd, pulling a confused Jameth with her. She was both proud of Theo for what he had done, and worried about what it meant for all of them. He had rescued a boatload of men and returned the widow’s sons to her. But at what cost, she wondered. If the Hazari were still after them, this could mean the end of their flight. But she knew where he and Kaspar were going now. They could not just leave Gehaz publicly now, not after announcing themselves. They would have to get away in secret somehow, and she would have to help.
Two hours later, after darkness fell, Trina was walking through the streets to find the sheriff’s house. her head covered with a scarf. She had found a room in an inn for the night and left Jameth there. How easy gold made things, she thought, again, as she hurried along the quiet roads. She had survived in the city with so little, struggling more often than not to eke out a living, to find places to stay and enough food to eat. The gold made it all so simple. Hand over some coins and you had a meal, a new set of clothes, a safe bed for the night. She and Jameth had stayed in the background and followed Theo and the others to the docks where he had watched as the boat was unloaded, and the happy cargo of boys rowed back to the shore. There had been plenty of joyful weeping as the boys stepped onto the dock, and as the sun finally set over the hills in the west she and Jameth had watched from a distance as Theo and Kaspar followed the sheriff to his home.
It was a short distance, thankfully. Jameth was yawning, lagging behind her every step, and she had to remind herself of the seriousness of the situation to keep herself going through her own tiredness. They had stayed in the shadows until they saw Theo and Kaspar enter the tall, stone-clad house of the sheriff, and then slipped away. After finding the inn, she had realised how ravenous she was and had eaten with Jameth in the crowded, smelly dining room where all anyone could talk about was the king’s son suddenly appearing in the village to save the boys who had been taken by the gang. Then it was upstairs to the room she had paid for, to think, if she could, what to do next. Jameth had collapsed across the bed and fallen asleep in a second, but Trina, tempted as she was to do the same, could not afford to be so relaxed. She had to find a way to get Theo and Kaspar away from the sheriff, and across the river as quickly as possible. They could not wait another day, leaving Pralin and Jandrin with the boys on the other side of the river. It would have to be tonight.  She had stared at the wall for a few minutes, then made up her mind, taken the moneybag from where Jameth had dropped it and left.
Now she was standing outside the sheriff’s house, hoping that her plan would work. She wondered if Theo would try to leave himself, to make it across the river to the rest of them, but he had seen her in the crowd. He knew, at least, that they would not think them missing. She pulled the scarf tightly over her head and walked up to the front door.
“Sir, Sir!” she called, knocking frantically. It was only a moment before a startled servant opened the door. “Please, call the sheriff!” Trina begged the girl. “It’s my brother – he’s at the square, and he’s caught a thief! A terrible thief, with a bag of jewels. Please, tell the sheriff to come!”
The servant hurried back into the house. Trina peered in, wondering if she dared to step inside. Not a good idea, she reasoned, and she was glad of it when the sheriff himself appeared, pulling on his navy jacket, picking up his sword from the table in the hall and charging out of the doorway. He barely noticed Trina and almost ran her over.
“Where?” he barked. “I’ve been looking for that jewel thief for months! Tell me where!”
“In the square,” said Trina, trying to look afraid and nervous. “My brother has him, near the platform. Hurry!”
It only took a moment and the sheriff was gone, hurrying down the street with his sword, a handful of men who had appeared from the back of the house with him.
Trina looked back into the house as the servant reappeared. She reached for her belt and pulled out a coin. The girl’s eyes widened.
“This is for you,” said Trina, softly. “If you can get a message to the king’s sons.”
“Ooh,” said the girl. “I don’t know. They didn’t want to be disturbed.”
Trina pulled out another. This time the girl took the coins, hiding them down her bodice.
“Tell them to come downstairs now. That it’s Trina. Do you hear?”
The girl nodded, dashing away. Trina stood at the door, her heart beating wildly. She looked around, hoping not too many people had heard the commotion and were watching out of their windows, hoping that they would be able to get away without being seen.
To her relief, Theo and Kaspar appeared in the doorway, shouldering their bags. Theo clasped her arm briefly, but she could see that he understood the urgency of the situation.
“He is gone?” he asked.
Trina nodded. “To the square to catch a thief. But it won’t be long before he realises that I was lying. We must hurry.”
“You are a jewel, Trina,” Theo said, shaking his head in disbelief. “You amaze me every day.”
“Come on,” she said, smiling, wishing she could embrace him, kiss him, show him how much it meant to her to hear his praise. But there was no time.
The princes hurried away from the house, Trina only pausing to hand the servant girl another coin. “You never saw them leave,” she said, sternly. “As far as you know they are asleep in their room. It’s very, very important.” She glared at the girl, hoping she might scare her into doing what she said. If the sheriff returned and noticed nothing until the morning, they had a chance.
An hour later, Theo, Kaspar, Jameth and Trina were at the docks again, now eerily quiet in the dark. It was a warm night, and although there was not much of a moon, the stars were out and they could see enough to know what they had to do.
“We must steal a boat,” said Kaspar, voicing all their thoughts.
“Steal?” asked Jameth. “Really?”
“What else can we do?” whispered Theo. “We must get across, and we cannot exactly hire a boatman now, can we?”
“What about your horses?” asked Jameth.
“We will have to leave them here,” said Kaspar. “We can’t sneak horses across a river.”
“I will go and find a boat,” said Trina. “If I am noticed it won’t matter as much as if you are. Wait here.”
“No, Trina,” said Theo, taking her arm. “You have already put yourself in so much danger for us.”
“I can do it,” she said, pulling away from him. “Time is running out.”
She walked across the cobbled stones of the dock, taking care not to look as if she was looking at the boats. Some of them, she noticed with concern, had lights on them. There were people sleeping on these boats. That made it even more difficult. At last she spied what she wanted – a small rowboat that looked as if it would hold the four of them and not sink under their weight. It was tied, however, to a larger boat. But she had taken too long already. It would have to be this one. She hurried back to the hiding place.
“I found one,” she whispered. “But it is tied to a larger boat. Someone will have to swim to untie it, then bring it back to us.”
“Why don’t we all just swim to it?” asked Jameth,
“Trina can’t swim,” said Theo.
“What? Why not?” Jameth looked as if Theo had just told her she could not walk or talk.  Trina felt like slapping him.
“No private spring in my back garden, Jay,” she snapped, in a whisper. “No summer holidays at the lake, or leisure to learn things like swimming!”
“Quiet,” said Theo, putting his hand on her arm. “I will untie the boat. Is there somewhere for the rest of you to hide while I do it?”
“There is a ledge at the side of the dock,” said Trina. “We can crouch there out of sight. You can bring the boat to us and we can get on board, then row across. But we will need to be quiet. There are people sleeping on some of these boats.”
“I will do the swimming,” said Jameth to Theo. “You know I am better at it. You stay with Trina and Kaspar.”
Theo nodded, and Trina could tell he was surprised. One by one, Trina first to show the way, they crossed the open area to the side of the dock and slipped down onto the ledge. It was a tight fit, with Jameth on the ledge too before he got into the water. He pulled off his shirt and boots and lowered himself carefully into the black water. Trina shivered, almost glad she could not swim. It was terrifying to her, to think what lay beneath there. She pictured hidden rocks, sharp-toothed fish, slippery eels. As Jameth swam the short distance to the boat, impressively smoothly and quietly she had to admit, then effortlessly, it seemed, pulled himself into it, she had to forgive him for all his silly questions. He may not be too bright, she thought fondly, but he was brave. And generous. And very capable for a task like this. In less than five minutes, making hardly a sound, he had untied the boat, slipped back into the water and steered it towards them.
She climbed in, holding on to Theo’s hand tightly as he helped her. She was very afraid. She had not been afraid to knock on the sheriff’s door or to walk into inns to ask for a room. She had even, perhaps, been less afraid lying down in the road before the Hazari. Water, with its power to suck her into its depths and drown her, was far more terrifying to her than a man with a sword. Perhaps, she thought, sitting as still as she could in the boat as Jameth pulled his shirt back on and Theo and Kaspar began to row away towards the open water, she valued her breath more than she valued her blood.

Chapter 22
They were almost at the other side before they heard shouts, looking back to see bobbing lights on the other side.
“Curse it,” said Theo. “I was starting to think we had done it.” His heart beat fast, his arms aching from the rowing. He remembered, for a moment, rowing in the lake at the summer palace in the South. It felt as if those days were an eternity away.
“It’s all right, I think,” said Trina, as the little boat scraped against the mud of the bank and they began to get out. “If they follow us, perhaps they will be satisfied to find the boat and leave us to ourselves.”
“If it’s just the owners of the boat,” said Kaspar. “If it’s the sheriff he will probably pursue us. He’ll assume we were not who we told him after all.”
“If the servant girl says nothing then there’s a chance,” said Trina, stepping into the dark water. The boys pulled the boat up as far as they could, leaving the oars inside, and they all made for the thick bushes not far away. His feet were wet in his boots, but there was no time to stop. He reached for Trina’s hand as they ducked into the bush, desperate suddenly to keep her close. She had come back for them. She had found a way to get the sheriff away from his house. They were here now because of her. Even as he ran, even as he shoved branches away and felt his clothes tear, his heart swelled with admiration for her. There was no better woman in all of Kalathan, he thought. No one half as clever, surely, no one half as brave.
The boat had landed at a point on the river much further south than the ferry dock. It took an hour to reach the others, running at first, although when they realised they were not being pursued they slowed down to a hurried walk. Theo felt fine; he had slept well the night before in an inn with Kaspar, and although the day had been tense and stressful he felt full of energy, as if he could run all night if he had to. But Trina was exhausted, and he felt that holding on to her hand was all that was keeping her going. She has been through so much, he remembered. Prison, and the shrine, and the flight through the forest. The Hazari, running out of water in the mountains, and what must have been hungry, anxious days when he and Kaspar had been with the Issyaks.
But then they reached the others, and he was surprised at the relief he felt to see Ben and Maikal and Jan, sleeping in amongst the packs with Pralin on guard.  He realised only then what danger he had put them all in by doing what he had done. They had been stuck here, unable to continue without them, targets for the Hazari who could have heard by now that he had been in Gehaz. In half an hour they were on their way, grateful for the starlight, a sleepy Maikal riding with Theo, and Ben on one of the packhorses, now that they were two horses short.
They rode through the night, the rough, narrow track sometimes forcing them to ride in single file. They had agreed to ride until dawn, and then to find somewhere to rest for a few hours before continuing into Ahrania. Theo, holding up a sleeping Maikal, kept his eye on Trina too, but although he could see she was struggling to keep her eyes open, she was strong in her saddle.
The sky began to turn grey, and after the hours of riding up the steep road they were high in the mountains now. These mountains were different, though, not as grey and desolate as those on the other side of the river. Even in the half-light Theo could see they were greener. He turned around in his saddle to see the sunrise, the faint orange light showing the valley they had just left spread out behind them. He could see the river winding its way south. Maikal stirred in his lap, but remained asleep, and he turned forward again.
Trina was riding beside him, staring blankly ahead. “You all right?” he asked.
“Talk to me,” she said, smiling wearily. “Help me to stay awake.”
“There’s a patch of woods, it seems, down there. We can stop there to rest for a while.”
She nodded, looking down over the mountain slope. 
“You were wonderful,” he said. “I was going crazy in the sheriff’s bedroom, wondering how we were going to slip away and find the rest of you. I thought I had ruined it all.”
“You almost did, brother,” said Jandrin, intruding on the conversation from behind him. “What the blazes were you doing?”
Theo had to explain it all. And Jandrin was not impressed with the story.
“What? You risked all of us for that?”
“They were children, Jan. I couldn’t—”
“How do you think we have enough soldiers in the army, Theo? Do you think they all march happily into the recruitment offices to offer themselves for service?”
“What are you saying?”
“I’m saying that Father will be mad to hear what you did. He knows about the press-gangs. He orders them, Theo!”
“I can’t believe that,” said Theo. “At least, I don’t want to. The further we get from home the more I realise how little I know. Human sacrifice, and press gangs? If that is how Father does things, then—"
“Then what, Theo? If you are this soft you will be weak and ineffective when your time comes. A king needs to be firm. A king knows more than anyone else that the end justifies the means. And if the end is Kalathan’s glory then press gangs are perfectly justified.”
“Rather weak than cruel, Jan. I won’t be a king like that!”
“I did not say that Father is cruel!” Jandrin was angry now, almost shouting at Theo. Maikal had woken up now, and was rubbing his eyes as he looked around him. “I am saying that kings have to be hard sometimes, to choose the lesser of two evils. If you don’t grow out of your sentimentality soon, you will be a hopeless king, Theo!”
Theo stopped his horse now, as Jandrin rode up beside him and stopped too. “All my life,” he said coldly, “the crown has been my destiny. Since I was old enough to understand it, everything I have done has been working towards that goal. Don’t accuse me of sentimentality, Jan. I am only trying to do the right thing!”
“You know,” said Jandrin, “until you hurry up and find a wife and have a son, I am your heir. As it stands, if you catch a fever or fall off your horse it all comes to me. You don’t think I think about that, Theo? Do you think you are the only one burdened by the prospect of leading Kalathan?”
“God help Kalathan if that happens, Jan!” Theo was angry. He didn’t mean it, but he was mad.
“So you can do better.”
“That’s not what I meant.”
“It is what you meant.”
“Maybe it is, then. You are proud, Jan. Your birthright is a responsibility as well as a privilege. You could have the welfare of thousands of people in your hands. You need to be worthy of that!”
“As you are? You are so worthy? Carrying on with a devilclaw? What would Father say about that? You could do with a little pride, Theo, lowering yourself like that!”
Theo looked at Trina, the insult hurting him, he thought, more than it hurt her. She was used to it; he was not. Maikal was trying to say something to him, but he lifted the boy off the horse, put him onto the ground and turned back to his brother. “I am not carrying on with a devilclaw! How many times must I explain? Don’t insult me by suggesting I am lying. Trina and I …”
“What? Don’t tell me. You love her?” Jandrin glared at Trina, a look of disdain, of distaste. Theo gripped the reins tightly, determined to keep his cool.
“Trina listens to me. She helps me. Talking to Trina is like thinking. When we are together I can think, I can sort out my thoughts and find out where they are going. She is the bravest girl in all of Kalathan and she is my friend. I will not apologise or admit to any lowering of myself in loving her!”
“Loving her? She is a devilclaw, Theo!”
“Hilgar was a devilclaw. Did you know that?”
“Who?”
“Our tutor, the one who was dragged away in front of us. Don’t you remember?”
“I remember,” said Jameth, piping up from behind his brother. “He used to test us on the Old Tongue by writing jokes in it on our tablets.”
“I remember now,” said Jandrin. “He was fat. Not tall. Bald head. Really? Him?”
“He was a devilclaw, if you want to call it that. One of the servants spied on him and got the others to watch him. They managed to get ten uses of his left hand in one day against him, and that was it. He was taken away.”
“Where?” asked Jameth.
“To prison, of course,” said Trina. “Where do you think?”
“It’s not a crime to be a devilclaw, is it?” asked Jameth.
“No,” said Trina, not expecting him to understand. “But if you’re a devilclaw and you do something wrong the punishment is worse. He was your tutor and he was trying to hide it. If that man is still alive, he is in prison.”
“Don’t accuse me of being ignorant of Father’s ways,” said Theo, his voice raised, “when you are ignorant of things like that—"
“Please!”
Theo turned. Ben stood a few paces behind them with his arm around a tearful Maikal, looking up at them as they sat on the horses, his free hand clenched in a fist at his side. “Just stop, please!”
Theo’s heart sank in his chest. He had been so intent on being right, on defending Trina and putting his brother in his place that he had forgotten the young ones, listening to it all. He dismounted, walked up to them and put his hand on Ben’s shoulder.
“We’re just arguing, Ben. I’m sorry.”
“I hate it, that people like Trina have to suffer!”
“I’m glad you hate it, Ben. So do I.”
Ben sniffed and wiped his eyes. “You and Jan are fighting too much.”
“Yes you are!” piped up Maikal, stamping his foot. “Mother tells Ben and me not to fight but you do it much worse than we do!”
“I know,” said Theo. “Jan makes me crazy. But I shouldn’t fight with him.”
“Sorry, boys,” said Jan, dismounting too. “But someone has to tell Theo when he’s wrong. And I don’t want Trina to suffer. I just don’t think she and Theo should be such good … friends.” He glared at Theo.
“He’s not wrong!” said Ben. “I think it’s stupid, locking people up for using the wrong hand. Even if it says it in the Scriptures. I think the Scriptures are … just stupid!”
Theo stood still, shocked to hear the words. Sometimes, he might have thought the same, but he would never have said it so bluntly. “Don’t say that, Ben. There is a lot of truth in them. They are holy.”
“How do you know? They say people like Trina are cursed and evil. The priests do terrible things to them. It doesn’t matter if there’s some truth in it. I hate the Scriptures, and the Temple, and priests. When I get home I will tell Father I am not going to the Temple ever again.”
“Come, Ben,” said Jandrin. “You are a prince of Kalathan. You have to go to the Temple. Nothing is perfect, not even the Temple, but it’s part of our history. We don’t want to make God angry or he’ll curse us.”
“I don’t care,” said Ben, tearfully now. “If God wants to curse me then I don’t care. I don’t even want to be a prince of Kalathan. I want to go home, to Mother. I want to stop all this riding and running away. I want to go home!”
Theo stepped forward and put his arms around both boys as they sobbed. He looked over at Jan. Ben was right. This conflict had to stop. But if Jan carried on insulting Trina, what could he do? It was hard on all of them, this flight, but he had to stay strong for the young ones. The sooner they made it to Orendal, the sooner they found Dazmar and could find a way to get some news from Kalathan City and figure all of this out, the better.
“I want to go home, too, Ben,” he said. “We all do.” He looked over at Trina as he said it. She smiled at him, a smile that said so plainly that she appreciated his support, that she felt it too, what he had said. Going home, going back to his old life would mean the end of loving her. He didn’t want it to be that way, and he had spent many long hours in the saddle dreaming of ways that it could be different. Perhaps there was a way to get rid of the mark on her arm and bring her to the palace – but that would mean deceiving Father and everyone else. Besides, Jan and his brothers knew the truth and he could not ask them all to lie for him. Perhaps there was a pardon of some sort, a way to get around her status. The laws could be changed, but only by Father himself. And he doubted very much that his father, who took great pride in his own successful marriage to Mother, with her perfect pedigree and spotless reputation, would care to do such a thing for him. His thoughts always ended up in the same place: that it was impossible. He should forget about it, just be friends as he had said before, just appreciate the wonder that was Trina Delkarsin without wanting more from her.
But as they all got back on their horses and made their way, a silent, exhausted, forlorn group now, to the patch of trees and made their camp, he knew with every passing minute that he could not do that. I am yours, he said to her, silently, in his mind, as he watched her wearily handing bread to the younger boys, drinking from a waterbag, helping Pralin to make a small fire to boil water for tea and giving him that look she kept just for him. It was a look that reflected his thoughts exactly, he knew. It didn’t matter what happened now or in the future, they would always belong to each other somehow. He thought of Jandrin’s words and wondered whether that was a blessing or a curse.

Chapter 23
Ahrania. After all the weeks of travelling, after all the fear and the uncertainty, they were, at last, in this other country. It felt so strange, to know that the land over which they travelled was not Kalathan, that the road they found and the few hares the boys shot for the pot were not theirs to claim.
“I feel like a thief,” said Theo, putting down his spoon. They were camped for the night in yet another thicket of trees just off the road, the road they hoped led to Orendal, to Dazmar, and then to who knew what. They had a map, now, that they had bought in Gehaz. Trina knew Theo was hoping for answers, to an end to all the uncertainty. The twins, she suspected, hoped for nothing more than some pretty girls and an audience for their songs. But they were all weary of travelling, weary of the long days and the endless changing horizons.
“A thief, brother!” Jandrin laughed, his mouth full of rabbit stew. “Father can repay whatever we take. This may not be Kalathan, but you are still a king’s son.”
“Not the king of this land,” said Theo. The brothers seemed to have decided on a truce, and since the ugly argument on the road that day there had been no more conflict. She avoided Jandrin, though, more out of a desire to prevent problems than out of hurt after his insults. Prejudice against her was nothing new. Rather – Kaspar’s friendliness, Ben and Maikal’s affection, Jameth’s new respect and Theo’s love were the exceptions. She felt that she could not really blame Jandrin for simply believing what he had been taught.
“Did you ever meet the king of Ahrania?” asked Maikal, from where he sat on Pralin’s lap with his bowl of stew.
“No, Maikal,” said Theo. “I haven’t.”
“We haven’t met any of the kings of the neighbouring countries,” said Kaspar. “Father doesn’t like to invite them to the court. He doesn’t want them to get too interested in Kalathan.”
“Why not?” asked Ben. “They have their own countries. What would they want with Kalathan?”
“They want to trample all over us with their caravans and carts,” said Jandrin, with a flourish of his spoon. “The people in the West like to buy things from Mandaria and the East, and the only way to get from the one to the other is south through Parsia and then across the sea, or overland through Kalathan.”
“Across the Sapphire road!” said Jameth. “Let’s sing that song tonight, Jan, that epic about the Sapphire road. Do you remember the words?”
“I think so,” said Jandrin, putting down his bowl and reaching for his ever-close lute.
“What things do they want to buy, Theo?” asked Ben, as the twins began to tune their instruments. Trina carried on eating her stew, not in the mood for raucous singing but not feeling that she was in a position to say so. She would just have to put up with it again.
“Gold and silver, of course,” said Theo. “And saddles, and furs and wool. Lots of things. And the East, Mandaria and the countries around it, have all kinds of things that people in the West want. Remember Mother’s little jewel box? And her silk gowns? They all come from the East.”
“There was an ivory comb at the palace,” said Trina. “Carved with elephants. That couldn’t have been made in Kalathan.”
“No,” said Theo. “We have everything we need, though. We breed our own horses and we have our own animals for skins and furs and wool. We grow our own grain and make our own fabrics. We even grow tea, and spices, just like the ones we could buy from the East. We don’t need to trade much. We can look after ourselves.”
“So Father isn’t friends with the king of Ahrania at all?” asked Ben.
“I don’t think so,” said Theo. “I can’t even remember his name.”
“Bilzar,” said Kaspar. “He’s old, nearly seventy I think. He lives in the capital, Omentar, south of Orendal where we are going.”
“How did you know that, Kas?” asked Theo.
Kaspar shrugged. “I was just talking to some of the people at the court,” he said. “They were talking about the war. It came up.”
“What war?” asked Theo. “There is no war!”
“No, not a real war,” said Kaspar. “I mean the trouble on the border.”
“It’s enough of a war,” said Trina, thinking of her father. He had never called it a war either. He had always said he was fighting the enemies of Kalathan, protecting his country from losing its independence. She had never thought to question it. But if men were dying, if there were press gangs kidnapping boys to send to the border, it could be called a war, could it not?
Trina stood up and began collecting the bowls, needing a distraction from thoughts of her father. She wondered if she should go to the stream to wash them or fetch water and do it here. She was tired, weary right down to her bones, it felt, and not interested in singing and discussions about politics. They were still talking as she took the bowls away to the stream, deciding that she didn’t mind the short walk.
She knelt down and began to rinse them. When she was done, she looked up to find Theo watching her from the other side of the narrow stream.
“Where did you come from?” she laughed, standing up.
“I followed you.” Theo smiled and held out his hand to her. “Come with me? Just a few minutes. They’re all singing; they won’t miss us.”
She put her hand in his and crossed the stream, and they made their way, hand in hand through the trees. After a minute Theo stopped, looked around, then turned to her and pulled her into his arms.
“Tomorrow we’ll be in Orendal,” he said. “We might find Dazmar there. And after that …”
“It’s not even worth thinking about, Theo,” she said. She clasped her hands together behind his back, her head on his shoulder.
“I want to find a way,” he said, as she lifted her head and looked at him. “There must be a way, Trina.”
She shook her head, slowly. He did this, every now and then, and although it was flattering to know that he wanted to find a way for them to be together, it didn’t help in her own attempts to be realistic about it. “No, Theo,” she said. “Don’t. The only way is for you to abandon Kalathan, to abandon your family and your destiny and run away from your duty. You’re not going to do that. So stop thinking about it and just kiss me while you can.”
He bent his head and kissed her, and she closed her eyes and tried not to think that it could be the last time. Every time could be the last time; there was no way to know.
“Trina.” Theo held her face in his hands. “I’ve decided something. I’m not going to do that anymore.”
“Good,” she said. “I’m tired of trying to talk sense into you.”
“I don’t mean that,” he said. “I mean that I’m not going to kiss you anymore. It’s bothering me, that there’s no future in this. If I can’t offer you anything more than stolen kisses, then it’s not right.”
“Not right?” She shrugged. “I don’t know where you get that from. Nothing about any of this is right. We’re only here because of murder and treachery, because of lies and fear and violence. Your father tried to kill me, and someone is trying to kill you. It’s all a mess. This,” she said, kissing him on the cheek, “is something good. Don’t tell me it’s not right.”
“It’s not … honourable,” he said. “You said you wouldn’t be the kind of woman who—”
“Is that what you think?” she cried, stepping away from him. Jandrin’s accusations still stung. She had no way to prove that her motives were not mercenary.
“No.” Theo folded his arms. “You know I don’t. That’s why I don’t want to kiss you anymore.”
Trina was quiet, facing him with her hands on her hips. “I can live with that,” she said, softening and stepping forward again. “And as your future subject, I admire that sense of honour you have, Theo. I don’t need kisses, but just stay with me … here,” she said, putting a hand on her heart. “Until it’s over. Please.”
His arms were around her again, and she knew by the tenderness and pressure of his embrace that he would do what she asked. But she could hear Maikal calling. They pulled apart and walked the short way back to camp, where the twins and Ben were still singing the Sapphire Road song, and Pralin was getting out the bedrolls. And as the sun set on their first day beyond the borders of Kalathan, as her tired body relaxed and she drifted off to sleep, she felt, as she did every night, his hand searching for hers in the darkness. “I think you will always be in my heart, Trina,” he whispered over Maikal’s sleeping head. “Even when I am king, I won’t forget.”
“Neither will I, Theo,” she whispered back.

Chapter 24
Orendal was a shock to Theo. They had been in the city for a day already and he still felt as if he was in another world, not just another country. And it was hard too, to understand how it could even be called a city. The buildings were rough, simply constructed, the best of them barely better than Kalathan City’s worst. It was because there was no stone, he thought, as he and Trina walked along a street – if the packed earth on which they walked could be called that. There was none of the paving, no great tall buildings of the pale grey stone he had taken for granted all his life. These buildings were wood and brick, some roofed with grasses, two storeys high at the most. There were no tall walls, no iron-spiked gates, no aqueducts. No grand architecture, no spires and curls and domes. Refuse and filth flowed along shallow ditches beside the road, and as he walked, he had to resist the urge to hold his nose. And there was no Temple, of course, no bells, no priests. There were plenty of people about, but barely any horses, just a few donkeys and a great many goats.
And the people looked so different, too. They had paused before entering the city, Trina and Pralin going ahead to get a sense of the place while the brothers waited out of sight. The two had returned with bundles of clothing, the flowing pale-coloured tunics and trousers worn by the local men, with darker cloaks and jackets, and light wide-brimmed hats made of straw. He had tied on leather sandals and packed his boots away in his saddlebags, draping a scarf loosely around his neck as Pralin showed him. The twins had laughed at each other, saying they looked like women without their tailored jackets and boots. But he liked the clothes; he felt lighter and cooler without his leather vest and thick leggings, and besides, it was important that they fit in as much as they could. And the long, loose jacket meant he could carry his bow and quiver mostly concealed. It felt good to know he could defend them if he had to.
The language was strange, Trina had told them, as she emerged from behind a bush where she had gone to change into her Ahranian clothes, a loose dress of wine-red, white sleeves and bodice showing at her arms and neck. He realised, seeing her, that she had worn the same two brown dresses and white shift ever since he had known her, the same green vest and dull-coloured boots for all the weeks since they had left the city. She looked so different now, her face brighter, perhaps, against the colour of the dress. He liked it very much. “What?” she had asked, as he had stared at her. “Is it so terrible?”
He shook his head and asked about the language, wondering if they would be able to communicate. Trina shrugged. She and Pralin had managed to buy the clothes, but they had barely understood more than two words that the locals spoke. “It sounds a little like the Old Tongue,” said Pralin. “I thought I recognised a few words from the Temple.”
That was possible, thought Theo, as he walked the streets, trying to pick up snatches of conversation. Albrin and his conquerors had come from these regions. The Old Tongue was likely to be related to this language.
He and Trina passed a building that seemed taller than the rest. It had, unlike the other buildings, a tall doorway with a pointed arch. He looked up and saw a cross above the door, in the same position that the sword was placed above the doors of Temples in Kalathan. This was a church, he realised. A place where the Western people worshipped their God, their man-god, who had died on a cross. He pointed it out to Trina, and they stood for a minute, watching a few people go in and out of the doors. Then they walked on, looking for someone they might ask about Dazmar.
It wasn’t long before they came to a market, a quiet, empty sort of market, most of the stalls packing up for the day already. The first few people they approached looked at them strangely, shaking their heads at their strange talk and their repetition of Dazmar’s name. “It is like the Old Tongue,” said Theo, after a stall holder gave them a long answer they couldn’t understand. “I caught a few words there. He said something about foreigners, and sheep, I think. But maybe I heard wrong.”
“I didn’t get anything at all,” said Trina.
But the next person they asked, a small, elderly man packing up his sandal repair stall, nodded vigorously at the mention of Dazmar’s name, and realising they did not understand his speech, scratched a map for them in the dirt at their feet. Trina and Theo looked at each other, both sobered at the significance of these scratchings in the reddish earth. After all this time, they had found the way. The end of their flight could be close.
It was already late, and the place the old man had pointed out was a little way out of the city, on the road to the South. So in the morning, which dawned bright and hot, they left the inn where they had stayed overnight. Trina rode behind Theo, feeling, despite her resolve that she would accept whatever happened to her from here on, a sense of dread.
It was not yet mid-morning as they approached what appeared to be a farm. They turned off the road where the man had told them to, and soon rounded a bend to find themselves in a tree-lined avenue, a low wood-and-brick house ahead of them. It was definitely a farm; the smell of animals hung thick in the heat of the day, and the tell-tale flies buzzed around their faces. Trina was reminded of her mother suddenly, of Rilla and her grandparents in the small farming village in the South of Kalathan, and she felt her stomach constrict in a knot of longing. She was so far away from them, so far away from everything precious to her. Except for Theo, of course. He was right here, riding in front of her, his back straight and strong, ghosts of her hands in his as they lightly held the reins. If they could see her now, she thought, fighting back the sob in her throat. If they knew what had happened to her they would hardly believe it.
Their approach had clearly not gone unnoticed. A group of people was gathered on the broad wooden steps that led up to the wide doors that appeared to lead into the house. Men and women both, even, it seemed, a few children.
“It seems almost as if they are expecting us,” said Jandrin, as they rode nearer.
“How can that be?” asked Kaspar. “Unless Mother got a message here somehow.”
“I can’t see how she would have,” said Theo. “Perhaps that man who gave us directions let them know someone was coming.”
They rode onto the wide patch of earth in front of the house and dismounted. Pralin hung back with the horses, and Trina did too, feeling suddenly unsure of her place. But Theo stepped forward, his hand on Maikal’s shoulder, to meet the man who had descended the steps and was coming towards them, removing his straw hat as he did so.
He bowed slightly, one hand behind his back, his eyes sweeping the ground and up again to rest on Theo’s face. “Greetings, my lords,” he said. “I hear you are looking for Dazmar.” He was middle-aged, tall and slim, his greying hair long on the collar of the pale tunic he wore. And he had spoken, Trina realised, in perfect, unaccented Kalath.

Chapter 25
“We are,” said Theo.
“Then you have found him,” said the man, a smile playing around his mouth. “I am Dazmar.”
“My lord,” said Pralin, stepping forward. “Perhaps you remember me?”
Theo turned in surprise. Pralin recognised him? That must mean that he had been right. This man was Mother’s friend, who had left Kalathan when she had married the king.
“If I do,” said Dazmar to Pralin, “then you must know me by my other name.”
“Lord Shandar,” said Pralin, inclining his head. “It has been many years. I am Pralin. I worked for Lord Nisran.”
“I remember,” said Shandar. He stepped forward and clasped Pralin’s hands in his. “You worked for Nuria’s father, with the horses. And it has, indeed, been many years. Your presence, Pralin, helps me to believe that the letter I received a few days ago was indeed from the queen, although when I received it I could hardly believe it could be.”
“From Mother?” asked Ben, stepping forward. “Did Mother send you a letter about us?”
“She did,” said Dazmar, letting go of Pralin’s hands and facing the rest of them. He smiled, holding out his arms. “Welcome to my humble home, princes of Kalathan. I am relieved and happy to see you alive and well.”
Dazmar’s home was not what it had seemed from the outside. The entrance opened onto a large grassed courtyard, around which was a covered walkway and a number of doors leading, it appeared, to smaller rooms. As Trina made her way across the grass with the others after their horses had been taken to the stables to one side, she saw people at the doors, women looking shyly out at them, and children lining the corridors, more open in their interest. There were men too, young and old, and a very elderly woman on a wicker chair covered in a blanket, who smiled a toothless smile at her as they passed her sunny spot. What was this place? A small village contained inside one building? Or perhaps a very large family? But she doubted that – there were too many of them, forty, perhaps. She had never seen anything like it before.
At the opposite edge of the courtyard were more tall doors, leading into a larger room, at the centre of which was a large table surrounded by simply-made chairs. There was a fireplace at one end, and various other chairs and tables scattered around. It looked, she thought, like an enormous living room. There were embroidered hangings on the walls, and rugs on the wooden floor. For a moment she thought she saw a Kalathan Temple sword hanging on the wall above the fireplace, until she realised it wasn’t a sword at all. It was a cross, like the one she and Theo had seen over the doorway of the church in the town.
“Please, sit,” said Dazmar, motioning to the large table. “We have much to speak about. Ilana will bring us refreshments.”
“Thank you,” said Theo, as Dazmar nodded to a dark-haired woman who stood by his side. She was small, yet her manner was confident, her expression curious and kind. Trina warmed to her, her intuition telling her that this woman would not be prejudiced against her. Her hand went to her mark, as she realised that being in Ahrania meant that for the first time in ten years she was not necessarily an outcast.
“My wife,” said Dazmar, as Ilana also bowed slightly to the princes. “She does not understand much Kalath.”
Ilana smiled and said something in Ahranian, motioning to Ben and Maikal.
“She asks if the younger ones would like to come to the kitchen for something to eat, and then to meet the other children,” said Dazmar.
Maikal and Ben shot pleading looks at Theo, “Of course,” he said. “Thank you, lady. But perhaps we can agree, Dazmar, there is no need for bowing. We are not in Kalathan. Here in Ahrania, we are nothing but travellers in a strange land, and you are our kind hosts.”
“No need, perhaps,” said Dazmar, as the boys followed Ilana out of a door at the side of the room. “But you are the future king of the country of my birth, if God spares you for the task. Please, allow me to show my respect.”
Theo nodded, and sat down at the table first. The princes sat too, followed by Dazmar and the others. One of the men saw Trina hesitate as she wondered if she was welcome, and offered her a chair, a respectful smile on his face. She was so surprised she didn’t even thank him.
“And these others?” asked Theo, looking around at the faces of the ten or so people, both men and women, who had followed them into the room. “Are you Ahranians?”
“Mostly yes, my lord,” said a tall, slim young man with dark hair falling over his face. He spoke in Kalath. “Hafna and Rushdi and their families are from Kalathan. They escaped, and we took them in.”
“Escaped?” asked Theo.
“We will explain later,” said Dazmar. “This is my son, Darian.”
The young man grinned. “Father has taught me Kalath,” he said, as if he was very proud of himself.
“Please,” said Theo. “Please tell us what our Mother has said to you. We have heard nothing since she sent a note telling us to flee for our lives. She told us to come to Ahrania, to find you and to ask you to help us, for her sake. We know nothing else.”
Dazmar leant forward on the table, his arms folded, his expression serious. “I knew your mother many years ago, before she married the king.”
“We thought that might be the case,” said Theo.
“He wanted to marry her but then he discovered that we had been friends. He also discovered that I had a secret.” He lifted his sleeve to show a mark, one exactly like Trina’s. She drew her breath in, sharply. She had been right. She put her hand to her chest, surprised at the emotion she felt. This man was a leader, clearly respected by these people, yet he was just like her. He even had the mark. It meant that there was hope, she thought, for someone like her. Outside of Kalathan, she was not cursed. It was a strange feeling, one that was hard to understand. It felt disloyal, to think that she could have a different, better life outside of Kalathan. Disloyal to a country that had rejected her, yes, but still, although she had dreamed of a life where she was no less than anyone else, she had never thought she would need to leave Kalathan to find it.
“I was … strongly encouraged to leave Kalathan,” he said. “I was arrested, taken to the local jail, and marked. The next morning I was given a bag of gold and a horse and told to leave the country and never come back. Such was the king’s concern for the reputation of his queen.”
Trina looked at Theo, but his face betrayed nothing. He had suspected this, she knew. Jandrin sat back in his chair beside him, already drinking from one of the glasses of pale amber liquid that Ilana had brought. “As it should have been,” Jandrin said, giving Dazmar a look that communicated clearly his feelings on the subjects of devilclaws and the queen’s reputation.
“That is a matter of opinion,” said Dazmar. “Nuria was, and still is very dear to me, although I have not been in touch with her since the day I left Kalathan. I sent word to my family, every few years, and perhaps she heard about my new name and my new life from them. I lost my family, my lands, my title – the future that awaited me disappeared in an instant that day. But it makes me glad that we were friends enough, and that she trusted in my continuing affection enough to have sent me a letter explaining what had happened and asking for my help.”
“Continuing affection?” Jandrin sounded angry. “Just tell us what it said. You are certainly taking your time.”
Dazmar gave Jandrin a look, one that lasted a moment longer than was comfortable. He did not seem upset at all, only sympathetic. Jandrin didn’t deserve his sympathy, thought Trina. He felt threatened, she suspected, by Dazmar’s calm authority, by his own lack of status and advantage in this place, and he was reacting with his usual rudeness. “The letter said that she had uncovered a conspiracy against the king. The journey you were sent on, supposedly a pilgrimage to a shrine, was a ploy to get all of you out of the city, away from the protection of the palace. Someone had enlisted the services of the Hazari to track you down and kill you on the road.”
“We knew all that already,” said Jameth. “Does she say who wanted us dead? Or why?”
Dazmar shook his head. “One of the hired assassins had a conscience, it seemed. He came to her in secret a few days after you left on your journey and told her about the commission. He would not say who had hired them, only that none of you would be safe in the city, and that the danger was inside the palace. That is all she knew when she wrote the letter. I pray to God that no one knew she knew this, or she might have put herself in great danger sending the letter to me. I can only imagine her fear.”
“And what are we supposed to do now?” asked Jandrin, looking at Theo and his brothers. “This is barely more than we knew before. I say we go home. We killed the Hazari, surely the danger is past?”
“Don’t be ridiculous, Jan,” said Theo. “If someone hired the Hazari to kill us, whoever it is he is serious about wanting us dead. Perhaps he thinks we are dead already. If we appear in the city – there is no way to know if the threat is past.”
“So we stay out here in the middle of nowhere until when, Theo? Until Mother sends another note?”
“We need to find out more,” said Kaspar. “Until we know who it was, we cannot know if we are safe.”
“You are right, young man,” said Dazmar. “Until you have more answers you are safe here, with us.”
“Dazmar,” said Theo, leaning forward now. “I apologize for what my father did to you. I do not believe in the devilclaw curse, and I do not believe that he had any reason to be concerned for my mother’s reputation. You were wronged, and I am sorry for it.”
Dazmar seemed taken aback. “Thank you,” he said. “I ask for no apology, but on behalf of my younger self, I accept it. I am happy to help Nuria’s children however I can. Until you know more and are confident to return to Kalathan, you are welcome here. If there is a threat against you, you have our swords.” He looked up at the other people around the table, who nodded agreement. Even the women nodded, Trina noticed with surprise.
“But please, explain all of this,” said Jandrin, draining his glass and waving his hand around at the room. “What is this place? Some kind of shelter for outcasts? Why do you all live here like this?”
Dazmar and a few of the others laughed, and Trina noticed with some satisfaction that Jandrin looked put out. He had not intended to be amusing.
“We are a community,” said Dazmar. “When I came to Ahrania, I was alone. I had money, as I said, from the king, but I had no friends at all. I was angry and sore and I felt betrayed by my country. So I chose to visit a place that stood in opposition to Kalathan and everything it stands for. I visited the Christian church.”
“The church?” asked Theo. “That small building in the town with the cross above the door?”
Dazmar nodded. “You noticed. I listened to what was said in the church, hoping only to express my rebellion by entertaining the thought of a different faith, and to find a way to refute the belief in my curse. But over time, I came to believe in something else. I discovered the Christian scriptures. I discovered the true Word of God.”
“The true Word of God is the Scripture of the Kalathan Temple,” said Jameth. “Everyone knows that.”
“Everyone in Kalathan knows that,” said Dazmar. “So did I, once. But I don’t believe that any more.”
“The Christian faith,” said Theo, as if he were thinking hard. Trina saw the deep furrow in his brow, and remembered their many conversations about his studies, his discoveries in the archives. “Is this the faith of the Western Empire? The belief in the man-god who died?”
“It is,” nodded Dazmar. “Although the Emperor would not, perhaps, recognise the message of the Christian scriptures if we were to tell it to him as we understand it. There are massive churches in the Empire, huge cathedrals where hundreds worship. But often the message taught there has been dulled and changed and saturated with unnecessary ceremony. The Emperor claims faith, but he is a cruel man and a tyrannical leader. I doubt that he knows God as we do.”
“Knows God? How can you talk about knowing God, as if he can be known like a person? This is nonsense,” said Jandrin. “And you still haven’t answered my question. What is this place?”
“This place is a community of Christians,” said Dazmar, pointing to the cross over the fireplace. We are all Christians here, and we live and work together. We study the Scriptures, we teach and encourage each other, we raise our children to believe. And we also send messengers out to preach.”
“Preach?” Kaspar was interested. “There was a man in the town square in Gehaz, standing on a box and speaking to all who would listen. I heard him say something about the Temple, and there was a priest shouting to him to come down and be quiet or he would call the sheriff. Was that … a Christian?”
Dazmar nodded, but it was Darian, his son, who answered. “He’s probably in prison by now, then.”
“As he should be!” cried Jandrin. “This is not Kalathan, so I suppose you are welcome to believe what you like, if your king does not object. But in Kalathan anyone who tries to preach something other than the Temple faith is a traitor!”
“Indeed,” said Dazmar. “A traitor to the king, but as we see it, obedient to God. Obedience to God comes before loyalty to an earthly king.”
“But God puts the king in place,” said Theo, although Trina could see the doubt in his expression. He was leaning forward, staring at Dazmar, interested.
“The king,” said Dazmar gently, “is, with all due respect, just a man. God puts him in his place, yes, but as a part of his greater plan, not necessarily as one who speaks on his behalf. Perhaps this is a little too much to take in all at once, but if you are to stay here, we need to make one thing clear. The Temple faith is at best a slowly evolved mixture of Christianity and the pagan beliefs of the original Kalathan tribes, at worst a deliberate plot to subdue a conquered land. The Temple Scriptures are a confused jumble of the true Word of God combined with the imaginative ramblings of centuries of puffed-up kings and drunk priests. As it is now it is a lie, a deception, an excuse to isolate Kalathan and to vilify other nations. Here, we worship the true God through his son whom he sent to earth to die for us. We are all equal under God: equally sinful, equally blessed, all worthy of each other’s respect.”
Jandrin was staring at Dazmar, open-mouthed. Jameth, too, looked shocked and offended. But Trina, watching the faces of Kaspar and Theo as they listened to this speech, saw something else. There was no anger or offence in their expressions, only fascination, she thought. Kaspar was almost smiling, as if Dazmar’s words were an exciting development in a story or a play, as if he was anxious to hear more. And Theo – Theo looked as if he had been blinded by a bright light. All his doubts and questions, she thought, remembering their conversations on the journey through the forest, had been considered before. He had not been the first to weigh up what he had been taught and find it lacking. Here was someone who had faced hard questions and actually taken a step towards what was, for Theo, forbidden territory. Here was a man who knew the Kalathan faith, who had also seen its inconsistencies and cruelties, and had come to a conclusion more radical than any conclusion Theo had ever imagined reaching. Dazmar, a noble of Kalathan, had not just considered, as Theo had, that there were mistakes to be rectified and changes to be made. He had thrown it all out completely and taken on this new faith as his own. And Trina knew Theo well enough to know that he did not intend to brush this man off as a fool. He would find out, she knew, he would learn what he could, he would keep looking for the truth. Just what that was, she had no idea. But Dazmar was convinced, and his conviction was not something that she felt she could ignore.

Chapter 26
Theo sat at the table in Dazmar’s large dining hall, a mug of the strange, fragrant Ahranian ale before him. He had an idea that he had drunk quite a lot of it and that he wasn’t feeling quite himself. Dazmar had good-naturedly warned them not to drink more than a mug or two, but he had not listened. It made him feel good, to drink it, to feel his busy mind drifting away from everything the day had brought. The identity of their enemy, the implications of what Dazmar had said about the Temple – it was all fuzzied in his head, and he was glad for that. Trina was at his side, staring absently across the room at Jandrin, who was reclining on a couch, his arm draped casually around Shamia, Dazmar’s very pretty daughter. Jameth was sitting by the fire playing his lute and singing; at his feet sat another of Dazmar’s daughters, also holding an instrument, and a few other girls all listening and singing along at the choruses, the Kalath sounding strange in their strong accents as they tried to follow the words. It was a gentle ballad that made Theo feel sleepier the more he listened.
Jandrin pulled Shamia closer. The children and the older ones had long gone to bed; it was just the princes and Trina and a few of the other young people left now. It’s just as if we are back at the palace, thought Theo. He was at a party, listening to the music, watching his brothers charm the girls. But this time Trina was beside him, not some forgettable court girl talking about her canaries. Even through his sleepy eyes she looked wonderful to him in her Ahranian clothes, the short white sleeves under the deep red dress fluttering on her arms when she moved, her mark clearly visible as she lifted her hand to push it through her hair. He could see the smooth skin at her neck, the shape of her body under the soft fabric. But her hair looked different – clean, he realised, feeling as if that was really rather funny.
“Your hair, Trina,” he said, reaching out to touch it. It was brushed out on her shoulders, its gentle waves shining in the light of the lamps. “It’s so … clean.” He grinned, stupidly, feeling sure she would find it as funny as he did.
Trina turned to him, but she didn’t look as if she appreciated the comment. She looked down at the mug in front of him. “How much of that have you had, Theo?” she asked.
“I don’t know,” he said, squinting at the mug. “I can’t really say.”
“You, prince,” she said, raising her eyebrows and smiling a little, “are a little drunk. Perhaps you should go to bed.”
“I’m not drunk,” he said, shaking his head. But the thought of going to bed was not unpleasant at all. “You could come with me, if you like.”
He didn’t really know why he had said that. He shook his head again, as if he could shake away the words. Perhaps she was right, and he had drunk a little too much. But it would be so nice …
And now she had folded her arms, and she wasn’t happy at all. “It’s not the first time I have been asked that by a man who wasn’t quite himself, Theo,” she said. She looked hurt, as if he had disappointed her. “I didn’t think I would ever hear it from you.”
He sat up straight, pushing the mug away from him across the table. He didn’t want to look at her face and see hurt. It wasn’t all right, that he had said that. He wanted that, yes, but he had never meant to say it. He was the king’s son; he couldn’t go around asking women to come to bed with him. Well – actually he could; it never stopped the twins – but he wouldn’t. He would never do that. It was against the laws of the Temple; it was irresponsible. It was disrespectful to her, and if there was a child that would cause a colossal mess. He had wondered, before, how the twins had stayed out of that kind of trouble. He had asked them once, and they had laughed at him, and he had not asked again. He stared at the mug, its intricate designs accusing him across the table. No wonder ale and arak and all those kinds of things were illegal in Kalathan. No wonder the priests, who were the only ones who were allowed wine, kept it to themselves and fiercely guarded their right. Another thing that had nothing to do with holiness, he thought, despondently. Holy wine was not holy at all, it was just another way to satisfy the bellies of greedy men.
“Forgive me, Trina,” he said, trying to exert his mind over the fogginess of his brain. “There is no excuse for that, but …”
“You should go to bed now, Theo,” she said, putting her hand on his shoulder. She didn’t look hurt and angry any more, only sad. “Alone. Tomorrow might be … you will need your wits tomorrow, I think.”
“I’m sorry,” he said, getting up to leave. He was distracted briefly by a high-pitched laugh, from Shamia, who was now half-tangled up with Jandrin, and a comment thrown their way by Jameth, who was still at the fire, something about what her father would say. The girls at his feet giggled, although they were unlikely to have understood what he had said. Theo looked back at Trina, who was pulling a shawl around her shoulders at the cool breeze from the open window. “That’s not … it’s not what I …” He didn’t know how to explain, and he wanted badly for her to understand. He rubbed his forehead. “You just look so lovely tonight, in that dress. And we are here at last – I am a little overwhelmed, I think.”
“It’s all right. It’s the ale talking, I know, and thank you for the compliment. But I told you before. I won’t do that. I won’t be that kind of woman.”
“I don’t want you to be,” he said, miserably. “I love you, Trina.” The words came out, again, before he had a chance to decide if he wanted to say them or not.
Trina stood up from the table now and lifted her hand to touch his cheek. He covered her hand with his own, hoping he wasn’t going to humiliate himself and cry. He was never going to touch ale again, that was for sure. “Oh Theo,” she said. “You don’t need to say that. Whatever happens now, it’s all right. You go to bed.” She put her other hand on his shoulder and reached up to kiss him on the forehead, and he went up the stairs, crawling under the covers beside Maikal and falling asleep before he had time to think of anything much at all.
Theo woke thirsty, achy, his pride wounded at the memory of the night before. Maikal was already gone, and he and Kaspar dressed to the sound of animals outside. As he opened the wooden shutters of the small, simply furnished room he had shared with Kaspar and Maikal, he saw some of the people from the day before, already hard at work in the fields. He saw a woman driving a wagonload of hay, men cutting grass, children carrying baskets, a young girl carrying a bucket towards a chicken coop near the house. But then it wasn’t a house. He didn’t know what to call it. It was simple and homely. It was comfortable and companionable. Whatever it was, whatever these people had, he liked it.
He drank his water, wondering for a moment who had put it beside his bed, then remembered with a pulse of shame Trina handing the cup to him as he had told her good night. He and Kaspar made their way through the courtyard towards the hall, cheerfully greeted with smiles, not bows, he noted with pleasure, by those he met on the way. Trina was there already, sitting at a corner of the large table with Maikal while he ate.
“Morning,” he said to her, ruffling Maikal’s hair and then sitting himself. If only there weren’t so many people around, he would take her in his arms, apologise again. He had behaved like a silly boy the night before, drinking too much and getting all sentimental. But she smiled at his brief kiss on the cheek, his earnest clasping of her hand.
“I am glad to see you are yourself again,” she said.
“Me too,” he said. “You’re enjoying that, Maikal?”
Maikal nodded, his mouth full of bread and honey.
“He wants to go and play,” laughed Trina. “I said he had to finish first.”
“There’s a farm here, Theo,” said Maikal, swallowing his bread. “They have pigs! I want to see them, and my friends are going to show me. Ben’s already eaten his breakfast and he’s outside.” He stood up, wiping the sticky trail of honey from his mouth with the back of his hand.
“Off you go then,” said Theo, glad to see him happy and excited. It had been so long since there had been children to play with.
Dazmar joined them as they finished their meal, brought to them by a few young boys and girls, older than Ben but younger than Kaspar. They all work here, Theo realised, noticing Ilana gathering dishes and Darian and Shamia sweeping out the fireplace. He looked down at his plate of eggs and vegetables and felt grateful and humbled, suddenly. He had no claim here, no right to anything, and yet they served him.
Afterwards, the young people cleared away the plates and the visitors remained around the table. Jan and Jay were there too, enjoying the food. He cringed at Jan clicking his fingers and calling for more. The night before he had explained briefly to Dazmar about Trina and how she had come to be with them. He had not explained his connection to her, though – what could he say? That he told her everything, that she had been a servant and a prisoner, but she would never be those things to him? That they had kissed, and held hands, and wished that things could be different? It wasn’t something that was easily explained. There was no word for what she was to him. But perhaps Dazmar had guessed – Theo had not tried to hide his affection for her.
“You have had a difficult few weeks,” said Dazmar, addressing them all as the last plates were taken away. Jandrin still scowled at him but he did not seem to notice. “I wanted to give you a chance to rest before I told you everything.”
“More blasphemy?” asked Jandrin, leaning back and rubbing his stomach. “Another attack on the Temple, perhaps? Or perhaps you want to preach to us, to convert us to your Christianity.” He turned to Jameth and laughed, but no one joined him. Even Jameth looked a little ashamed.
“More news that I am sure will be of interest to you,” said Dazmar, apparently unperturbed. Theo was feeling impatient with Jandrin. He would have to talk to him later, remind him that they were guests and to remember his manners. But he was alarmed at Dazmar’s serious tone.
“What news?” he asked.
“This plot against you that your mother discovered – do you have any idea who is behind it?”
“Not really,” said Theo. “If there is a traitor in the palace, I have a vague idea about who it might be. But as for the motivation for the treachery, I am clueless.”
“What idea?” asked Jameth. “You never said anything to us.”
“I suspect Shihazar,” said Theo.
Kaspar gasped. “Shihazar? Why?”
“The journey to the shrine was her idea,” said Theo. “Father did it because she suggested it. She could have planned it to get us out of the way. And I don’t trust her.”
“Nonsense,” said Jandrin. “Shihazar’s husband is the head fatir of the Temple!”
“And he is so old he can’t see straight,” said Kaspar. “That doesn’t mean anything.”
“And her nephew is our cousin. Asnan, remember?” said Jandrin. “Shihazar is odious and she smells like a musty cupboard, yes, and I’m not fond of her rants and prophecies, but she is part of our family. It couldn’t have been her!”
“I do not consider her part of our family,” said Theo. “And she manipulates Father. It makes no difference that she is Asnan’s aunt. It’s not as if we are close to him.”
“Right now that is insignificant in the light of what I am about to tell you,” said Dazmar. “I suspect that this plot against you is part of a much, much larger scenario, even if this woman is involved.” He leant forward on the table, his arms folded, his expression serious. “How much do you know about Kalathan’s relationship with the Western Empire?”
“We know that the Emperor Cedric would like Father to open Kalathan up for trade,” said Theo. “We know he has his eye on the old Sapphire Road. But Father doesn’t want that. Opening Kalathan up to traders will threaten our independence.”
Dazmar shook his head. “It’s not that simple, Theo. For Cedric, trade with the East is not a luxury or a privilege. It is essential to the life of the Empire.”
“What? How?” Theo was confused. To him, trade with other nations meant trinkets and silk dresses. Trade meant little markets near the borders where every year a small number of merchants were allowed to visit to exchange leather goods, interesting fruits, quaint artworks and other completely non-essential items.
“For Kalathan trade is a luxury,” continued Dazmar. “If trade broke down, Kalathan could still take care of itself; ever since the conquest it always has. It has the resources to remain independent of the nations around it. But the Empire is different. To maintain the Empire, Cedric needs money. He needs markets for the goods the Empire produces. He needs weapons to subdue rebellions and he needs the silks and spices the people demand. Pepper – do you have any idea how desperate Cedric is for pepper? Without trade with the East, the economy of the Empire could collapse. Cedric would have no gold to pay his armies. The outlying territories could rise up against him.”
“But there are other ways to reach the East,” objected Jameth. “There are other routes besides the Sapphire Road.”
Dazmar sighed and shook his head. “I know that Kalathan has been isolated, but surely the king’s sons know what is happening in the rest of the world? Surely you know what has been happening in Parsia?”
“Of course we do,” said Jandrin. “There has been a civil war. The Parsians have been killing each other with their curvy swords. We knew that.” He looked pleased with himself, nodding to Jameth who clapped him on the back.
“Yes, civil war,” said Theo. “It’s been a few years now. But I don’t …” But even as he said it, Theo started to understand.
“The Empire has had trade agreements with Parsia for centuries,” said Dazmar. “There are paved roads there that were paid for by the Empire, caravan routes, navigable rivers, all essential trade routes. There is access to the sea and to ships in the gulf. There was even a courier route from Cedropolis all the way to Mandaria that only took a few weeks. But in the last few years that has all changed.”
“The civil war has threatened trade with the East,” said Trina, her eyes wide. “The country is a warzone, and the caravans aren’t getting through!”
Theo wasn’t surprised, after all their conversations, at her insights. “You are right, Trina,” said Dazmar. “It’s chaos in Parsia, last I heard. The Sultan has lost most of his influence outside of the cities loyal to him, and there is a group called the Ishkalars who are, I hear, close to seizing power. If they succeed, then they are likely to isolate Parsia and close the trade routes permanently.”
“So he needs Kalathan,” said Theo. “Cedric needs Kalathan to open up to trade. And Father won’t even negotiate.”
“I have wondered,” said Dazmar, “why he has been so stubborn. He has refused even to meet with the Emperor or any of his envoys. As it stands now, there are no diplomatic ties between Kalathan and the Empire at all. All Cedric’s efforts to negotiate have failed. Last year he even tried to force a diplomatic party in under a white flag, and I heard that he even tried to send his brother, but the Kalathan army chased them out before they had a chance to speak to anyone. He has had no choice.”
“No choice but what?” Theo’s heart sank as he asked the question. He guessed the answer before Dazmar said it.
Dazmar paused, looking at each of the princes in turn. “There is an army massing on your South-West border, and another along the Southern border with Parsia in the lands still loyal to the Sultan. The last I heard, the Empire’s force is two hundred thousand strong. Whatever it may cost him, Cedric means to open Kalathan for trade. And I fear that he will not be satisfied with that. With an army that size, and with the element of surprise …”
“He will conquer us,” breathed Theo. “With an army like that and Kalathan unprepared …”
He looked over at Jandrin and Jameth, who sat forward now, listening, their faces pale.
“Two hundred thousand?” asked Jameth. “Are you sure, Dazmar?”
“That’s a conservative guess. It could be more.”
“Do you think Father knows about this?” asked Kaspar.
“Of course he doesn’t!” cried Jameth. “He would have told us. He only ever says that there is trouble on the border!”
“Trouble on the border,” echoed Theo. “In the council meetings they have spoken about raids. Attacks on the garrisons and the border posts. But we always fight them off. Father says it’s important to send the message that Kalathan won’t tolerate interference.”
“He can’t know,” said Jameth. “He would not have kept it from us.”
“He knew something was different,” said Theo, remembering the conversation he had had with his Father when they had spoken about the pilgrimage. “He said to me before we left for the pilgrimage that he was anxious to please the Spirit because things hadn’t been going well on the border. But I don’t think he could possibly know how serious it is.”
“We are doomed,” said Jandrin, leaning back and putting his hands on his head.
“What are you saying?” asked Kaspar, looking from one brother to the other. “That Kalathan is about to be invaded, and we will not be able to withstand it?”
“That is exactly what Dazmar is saying,” said Theo, feeling as if he was going to be sick. “If this is true, then Father’s insistence on our isolation has not saved Kalathan. It has opened up the path to our destruction.”

Chapter 27
The afternoon was hot, as the days before had been. Trina was outside, on a bench in the shade of an enormous tree, with Theo, the twins and Kaspar, watching Ben and Maikal as they splashed around happily with the other children in the stream that ran close to the house.
“They’re all right,” said Jandrin, his chin in his hands. “You wouldn’t think Kalathan was about to be overrun by a horde of stinking great barbarians, would you?”
“It wouldn’t be the first time,” said Trina, before she could help herself.
“Shut up,” said Jandrin. “What do you know about it?”
“I know Kalathan was conquered before, by an army of Westerners. It happened before, and it could happen again.”
“Watch your language, Jan,” said Theo. He was pale too, and since they had heard the news from Dazmar that morning he had been silent and brooding. “Don’t talk to Trina like that.”
“Or what?” Jandrin barely turned to look at him.
“This isn’t the time to argue,” said Theo, wearily. “We have to do something. We need to go and see the Emperor. Dazmar said that he has tried to negotiate with Father and that this is happening because Father has refused. Perhaps there is a way to prevent this.”
“What the blazes do you think we can do?” asked Jandrin, his temper flaring. “There’s an army almost bigger than our entire population waiting on our border. How can we possibly do anything against that?”
“We have to try!” Kaspar’s face was earnest, desperate almost.
“Would he even believe us when we tell him who we are?” asked Jameth.
“I hadn’t thought of that.” Theo looked concerned.
“You look so much like Father,” said Kaspar. “Perhaps that would help.”
“But Dazmar said your father has never met the Emperor,” said Trina.
“We will have to convince him,” said Theo. “We must get some better clothes, bring our weapons – and there are our seal rings.”
“He wouldn’t know about those,” said Jandrin. “If Dazmar is right and Kalathan has been as cut off from the rest of the world as he says, then …”
“It’s hopeless,” said Jameth. “and how would we explain how we are here? The story sounds ridiculous. Father sent us on a pilgrimage …”
“He probably wouldn’t understand that anyway,” said Jandrin.
“… and then we got a message from our mother to say there were assassins after us and we should escape to Ahrania. It sounds absurd.”
“But it’s true!” said Kaspar. He stood up and began pacing up and down in front of them. “It’s all true – he must believe us! We have to do something – think of all the people who will die. All the soldiers, all the innocent people! They will sack the city and who knows what they will do to Father and Mother! We must try, Theo, we must!”
“Kas,” said Theo, standing up and putting his hand on his brother’s shoulder. “We must try, you are right. Even if the chance of making a difference is next to nothing, we owe it to Kalathan to try. Perhaps we can convince the Emperor that we can get Father to negotiate.”
“Then should we not go straight back to Kalathan first? To talk to Father? To warn him?” asked Kaspar.
“I don’t think there’s time,” said Theo. “It will take a few days to ride to Cedropolis, but if we get back to Kalathan City in a week …”
“A week?” said Jameth. “After all the time it took us to get here?”
“If we go back to Gehaz we could travel down the river and be there in a week, yes. But then we will be in the city, and the border is a hundred miles from there. By the time we warn Father and travel back to the border it could be too late. And then there are the Hazari. We don’t know if we are safe in Kalathan yet.”
“We could get a messenger to travel to the city to warn Father,” said Kaspar.
“Yes,” said Theo. “You are right. We will have to ask Dazmar where to find someone to do that.”
“But we must go to the Emperor,” said Kaspar.
“Yes.” Theo took a deep breath. “We will leave as soon as we can.”
“All of us?’ asked Jandrin,
“You two, Kaspar and me.” He looked over at Trina, and she felt frozen for a second, realising what he was about to say. “Trina must stay here with Ben and Maikal. We can’t all go. It’s too dangerous, and we need to make sure …” His voice faltered. “We need to make sure that Kalathan has heirs. If the Emperor’s campaign fails, and even if it succeeds, we must make sure that some of us survive.”
“Don’t talk like that, Theo!” Kaspar was angry. “This will not succeed, it can’t! We have to fix it, and we have to survive!”
“I want to come with you,” said Trina.
Theo was looking at her, his expression determined. She knew that look. He had grown up a prince, after all, expecting to be a ruler one day. She could not blame him for his confidence and for expecting everyone, even her, to do what he said. But she was not going to let him get his way with this.
“No,” he said. “You must stay here. You could make a new life here, Trina, with these people. They would welcome you, if you wanted to stay.”
“I will not stay here,” she said, evenly, calmly. “You need me.”
She thought she saw Theo’s stare falter for a second, but he was not giving in so easily.
“It’s too dangerous, Trina,” he said. “It’s two hundred miles, at least, to Cedropolis. We need to travel fast.”
“You know I can keep up.”
“It’s not that.”
“Then what?”
“We will have to protect you. We don’t know who or what we will encounter on the way.”
“So I’ll be a burden?”
Theo said nothing.
“Trina can keep up,” said Kaspar. “She rides as if she’s done it all her life. You know that, Theo.”
“I’m not disputing that.” Theo faced Kaspar, angrily. “It’s just too dangerous.”
“More dangerous than fleeing through the forest with the Hazari after us?” said Trina. “More dangerous than crossing a mountain range with no food or water?”
“The stakes are higher this time,” said Theo. “We were running for our lives, but now it’s Kalathan that’s in danger. We don’t need …”
“Distractions?” laughed Jandrin, looking over at Jameth, who smiled too. “You don’t need Trina’s great beauty and charm distracting you from your mission?”
“No!” Theo’s voice was raised now. “Don’t you dare make a joke out of this. She’s not coming.” He didn’t look at Trina.
“What’s your story going to be?” asked Trina. “Four young men who can’t speak a word of Ahranian, armed with swords and bows, travelling to the city? What will you say when people ask who you are and where you are going? You might be captured and forced into the army. You heard what Dazmar said.”
“I don’t know yet,” said Theo. “We’ll ask Dazmar to help us with that. We’ll think of a way.”
“If I come with you, you won’t look so suspicious.”
“She’s right,” said Jandrin. “She can pretend to be my wife again.”
Theo’s scowl was black. “I don’t want her to come,” he said.
Trina’s heart sank. She had known, always, that it would end at some point, but she wasn’t ready yet. She was not ready to stay behind and play babysitter to Ben and Maikal. She did not want a new life in Ahrania. Kalathan was her home, her land, even if it had tried to spit her out. She wanted more time with Theo, as much as she could get, and she wanted to help save Kalathan. And now he was saying that he did not want her to come.
“I don’t want to stay here,” she said, fighting back the pricking behind her eyes. “This place is lovely, but I will not abandon Kalathan, even if there is a war. Take me with you and then I will make my own way back home. I’ll find my mother and my sister, or …”
“No, Trina!” Theo stepped towards her and clasped her shoulders. “Please, stay here with Dazmar. Where you will be safe.”
“Are you asking me or telling me?”
“I am asking you.”
“And I say no. I want to come with you, and I can help you. I can go into the towns, I can blend in, I can find things out like I did in Gehaz. You four will stand out like … like thoroughbreds in a herd of donkeys.”
Jandrin and Jameth laughed again, but Trina hadn’t meant to be funny.
“You open your mouths and anyone you speak to will know whatever story Dazmar comes up with isn’t true. You couldn’t look like ordinary farmers’ sons if you tried. And I also think that’s why the Emperor will believe you when you tell him who you are. This can work, if you can just make it to Cedropolis to see him. You need me, and you need a local Ahranian too. You need to ask Dazmar if there’s someone who will go with us. Maybe another woman.”
“What?” Theo shook his head. “Another woman? No, Trina.”
Trina wanted to stamp her foot like a child, but she folded her arms and faced him. “Stop saying no, Theo! You are not the only one who cares about Kalathan and wants this to succeed! You cannot do this on your own. You need help, even if it puts me or someone else in danger. And you have to admit that you don’t know everything!”
“Good luck with that,” muttered Jameth.
Theo and Trina faced each other.
“Please, Kaspar, Jan, Jay – can you give us a moment alone?” asked Theo. “Perhaps you can go back to the house. I need to speak to Trina.”
“You need to speak to her,” teased Jandrin, as he got up to leave. “You might as well let her come, Theo. Take your last chance of comfort before Cedric kills or imprisons us.”
Theo didn’t reply. Trina sat back down on the bench, feeling deflated, frustrated, hopeless in the heat. She wanted to go, she wanted to convince him to let her come, but at the same time it felt that even if she did it would be like clinging to a cliff by her fingertips. Time was running out, both for Kalathan and for this fragile thing that existed between her and Theo.
“Trina, please,” he said, as soon as they were alone. “Just stay here. For me.” He picked up her hand and held it tightly.
“What do you mean, Theo? For you?”
“I couldn’t bear it on top of everything else. I need you to be safe, here.”
“I understand that. But I want to come with you. I can help you. I’m not just saying that out of some misguided desire to be a saviour, I promise. I want to come.”
“I’ve been thinking,” he said, lifting his other hand to her face. “If we make it home, if we get there and things are anything like they were when all this is over, I can send for you.  I can send soldiers, and you and Pralin can bring the boys back and come to the city with them. Please, let me hope for that. Let me do what I need to do and hope for that day, knowing you are safe here, with Dazmar.”
“Send for me?” Now she was angry. “What are you talking about?”
“Just … say you will stay here and come when I send for you.”
“So you can install me somewhere, Theo? We both know there’s only one way we can be together and that neither of us will ever stoop to that. Or at least I hope you won’t. I told you, right from the beginning …”
“I know, Trina. That is not what I mean. But if I explain to Father …” His face was lit up with wild hope, and her heart sank to see it.
“You have lost your mind, Theo,” she said, taking his hand away from her face. “Have you really been hoping that, all this time?”
“Haven’t you?”
“No! Theo – your father considered me his property to give away to a spirit to be slaughtered! I am less than nothing, Theo – I know, not to you. But you cannot really have thought …”
“Trina – I don’t care what my father thinks. He is my king and my father, and I owe him my service, but I don’t believe any more that he is always right and that God is on his side. I don’t believe you are cursed. I don’t want one of the girls at the court, I want you. If there is a Kalathan to rule after this, If God spares my life, I want to spend it with you.”
“You have never asked me what I think of that!”
“I’m asking now. I am asking you to come to Kalathan when this is all over, to the city, to the palace. I want you to be my wife.”
Trina closed her eyes. He was so earnest, so sincere, and despite her frustration with him, his words touched her deeply. He loved her; he had only said it once when he had drunk too much ale, but she knew it. He loved her enough to have lost his mind now, thinking she could ever be his wife. From the prison to the palace. A devilclaw, the queen and the mother of future kings? It was laughable, absurd, and he knew it. And even if it was possible, she did not want that. She loved Theo, whatever that meant, but this crazy dream of his had another side to it. He wasn’t thinking of the part where even if the king agreed (and she knew he would not), even if laws were changed and the earth moved to allow them to marry, it would be a miserable life for her in the court. And besides, as he had said, Kalathan might not survive this threat at all.
“Theo,” she breathed, leaning forward and pressing her forehead against his. “There is no future like that for us. There is only now, and tomorrow, and the days after that until we get back to Kalathan, if we get back at all. Let me come with you now. It may be all the time we have.”
He put his arms around her, pulling her head onto his shoulder. “So much has happened already,” he said softly. “Things beyond anything I had ever imagined. The world outside of Kalathan is nothing like I expected, and I won’t just go back to being satisfied with the way things have always been. Maybe you are right, but I don’t want you to be. Whatever happens with the Emperor, with the war, there will be a new Kalathan after this. I want you to be a part of it.”
Trina lifted her head to look at him again. “You are making me hope,” she said, her voice catching in her throat. “Don’t make me hope, Theo.”
“Good,” he said. “Don’t look so angry with me for trying. Hope is good.” He leaned down and kissed her gently on the lips.
“You said you weren’t going to do that anymore,” she said, trying in vain to control her voice.
“Trina,” he said, feeling the dampness on her cheeks. “You’re crying.”
“I want to come with you,” she said, again, wiping at the wetness on her cheeks. “Don’t leave me here. And don’t talk like that, please.”
“All the fear, and the hardships. The danger and the exhaustion – and you cry for this?”
She nodded. “Don’t make me hope,” she said again. “And I am coming with you.”
“I don’t think I have a choice.”
She shook her head. “You need me.”
Theo brushed away a tear from her cheek. “That, my love,” he said softly, “is exactly what I have been trying to say.”

Chapter 28
Dazmar had called a meeting of the community council, a group of ten men and women who were the leaders of the community. Theo and the older brothers sat around the huge table with them after dinner that evening, as Dazmar explained the situation in Ahranian. The more Theo heard the language, the more he heard the similarities with the Old Tongue. He was picking out words now, more than he could before.
When Theo mentioned wanting to find a messenger to go to Kalathan City, there was quiet. Dazmar looked across the table to a middle-aged man, slight and dark-haired, who sat with his arms folded.
“You know what we are thinking, Shazir,” said Dazmar, in Kalath.
“Shazir?” Theo was surprised. “But that is …”
“A Kalathene name, yes,” said the man. “I was imprisoned fifteen years ago for preaching Christianity. I escaped and made my way here. I have not seen my family in all that time.”
Theo felt uncomfortable. He never knew how to feel when he heard about people suffering under his father’s rule. But then a few weeks ago he would not have given a second thought to the justice of imprisoning a man for preaching against the Temple.
“I am sorry for your suffering,” he said, hoping it sounded sincere.
The man smiled. “I have lived here with Dazmar for the past ten years. I sometimes go back into Kalathan to visit the secret churches there and to preach. I could take a message to the city. But I do not think I would be taken seriously, bringing news like that.”
“You would have to prove that you have seen us,” said Kaspar. He turned to Theo. “He can take your seal ring. You can write a letter, and Father will know it is from you when he sees the ring.”
Shazir nodded. “I will go, gladly,” he said. “If warning the king will save lives then I will do it. Although …” he addressed Dazmar, speaking in Ahranian this time.
Dazmar nodded seriously as Shazir spoke.
“You said something about defeat,” said Theo to Shazir. “I think the word is the same.”
“He did,” said Dazmar. “You must know, brothers, that although none of us desire the suffering of Kalathan, an end to your father’s rule will …”
There was a crash as Jandrin leapt to his feet, his chair falling over behind him. “How dare you?” he shouted. “You, nothing more than a filthy devilclaw yourself, dare to speculate about an end to the King’s rule? If Kalathan is defeated, it’s an open door for you and your preachers, isn’t it? You want Cedric to invade! You want him to succeed!”
“Jan!” said Theo, standing up. “Sit down and talk respectfully to our hosts, or leave!” This was the last thing he needed now, to have to deal with Jandrin’s temper.
“Fine,” said Jandrin, stepping backwards and almost tripping on the chair. He swore, loudly, as he did. “You keep sitting here talking casually to the devilclaw and the criminal about how it’s going to be so convenient for everyone if Kalathan is invaded and opened up for every louse-infested camel train to trample over. More jewels and silk and Christianity and damned PEPPER for everyone! WONDERFUL!” He stood still, his face red, his chest heaving, most of the Ahranians looking down at their laps.
“Let’s go, Jan,” said Jameth, getting up too. He took his brother by the arm and began to walk away. “Come outside.”
Jandrin submitted, throwing the wooden cup he still had in his hand across the room as he left. Theo sat still as it clattered to the floor, ashamed at his brother. “I am so sorry, Dazmar, everyone,” he said, feeling as if his words were ridiculously insufficient. “I will speak to him.”
“It’s all right, Theo,” said Dazmar. “This news is a shock for you all. He is concerned for Kalathan and I can’t blame him for not trusting us. But please, be assured – although we pray for Kalathan to be open to Christianity, none of us would wish war and suffering on anyone.”
“I believe you,” said Theo.
“But perhaps when you do have a word with your brother,” said Dazmar, grinning a little as he shifted in his seat, “you could add that I would prefer that he stay away from my daughter.”
“Of course,” said Theo, remembering the night before. “Again, I apologise for his behaviour. There is no excuse for his disrespect and ingratitude.”
“Let’s get back to business, then,” said Dazmar. “Shazir will take a message to Kalathan City to warn the king about Cedric’s army. And you and your brothers will travel to Cedropolis to meet with Cedric. You will need someone to accompany you, I assume.”
“We will,” said Theo, looking at Trina. She nodded and smiled, and he was glad that he had given in about her coming. “We hope that you will allow the younger two to stay here with Pralin until it is safe for them to return to the city. And we need someone who can speak Ahranian, who can show us the way.”
“You need a guide,” said Dazmar. “If you attempt to cross over into the Empire alone and make it to Cedropolis without someone who knows the language and the land, you are bound to fail. I think I have just the man for the job. He knows the city, and he speaks Ahranian, Empirian and Kalath.”
“Who?” asked Theo, looking around at the gathered council, wondering if the person he had in mind was one of these.
Dazmar leaned back and folded his arms. “Myself,” he said, looking over at his wife, who was shaking her head, a stricken look on her face. “I will personally accompany you to meet the Emperor, to do what you can for Kalathan.”

Chapter 29
They rode hard, every day, and despite her confidence that she could keep up, Trina struggled to match the endurance of the princes and Dazmar. With Dazmar travelling with them, there was no need for the caution they had imagined. They didn’t need her after all, Trina realised. But she was glad that she had stood her ground and come along. It would be comfortable to be in Ahrania now, milking cows and playing games with Maikal, but her place was here, with Theo. She did not doubt that.
It took two days to reach the border of Ahrania, and on those first nights they slept in inns, keeping a low profile, Dazmar doing the talking for all of them. Theo kept her close, on the rides and near him at night, and there was a quiet understanding between them. He did not mention the future. Rather, when Dazmar asked her about her family, she told him about the town where they lived in the South and said that if they ended up travelling back to Kalathan City after seeing the Emperor, she would leave the princes on the way to join them. She was not quite sure when she had decided this, but it was quite clear in her mind that when all this was over, she would not stay in the City. It helped, when she caught Theo’s eye or felt the pressure of his hand in hers, to remember that when his love was no longer with her, she would still have the love of her mother and sister.
But the idea of travelling back to Kalathan was still just a hope. They had not discussed what they would do if the Emperor refused to negotiate. If there was an invasion, then Theo and the princes would perhaps have to return to exile in Ahrania until it was over or take the risk and find a way to get back into Kalathan to support their father. When the stakes were so high it did not feel right to dwell too long on the possibility of failure.
Jandrin had his usual suggestive comments to make on the first evening at the inn when Theo said Trina would sleep in the large room containing two beds and a spread of pallets on the floor with the rest of them, but Theo glared at him, daring him with his eyes to challenge him. Trina didn’t care one fig what Jandrin thought about it, and neither did Theo. After all this time, after everything that had happened, she was not going to go off and sleep in a room alone, just because she was a woman. She wanted to stay with them, and Theo understood.
Over their dinner, Theo wanted to explain to Dazmar. “Trina and I have become close over this journey,” he said to the older man, as they sat on the pallets on the floor and ate the meal brought up to their room. “But …” He looked at her as he spoke. “But we both know there is no future in it. Jandrin makes it sound as if Trina is scheming to push her way into the palace.”
Jandrin snorted. “Do you blame me, when you have spent most of this journey in a tent together? When you look at her like a sick dog and hold hands every chance you get?”
Theo did not take the bait, and Dazmar nodded. “You are an unlikely pair, as far as appearances go.”
“More than unlikely,” said Trina.
“Yet you care for each other,” said Dazmar. “I see it. So can your brother. Perhaps that is why he makes you suffer.” He nodded to Jandrin, who sat back with a mug of ale, scowling.
“I see her trying to get what she can out of it,” he said. “She says she has no intentions, but we will see what she demands once we are back home. No devilclaw woman would worm her way into a prince’s arms without hoping for something.”
“Do you forget, Jan, that Dazmar is also a devilclaw?” asked Theo. “We need a different word for it, though. I can’t call it that any more.”
“I haven’t forgotten,” said Jandrin. “You are useful, Dazmar, I will admit that. Even if you are a devilclaw.”
Dazmar shook his head good-naturedly, lifting up his mug of ale. “Glad to be of use, Jandrin, even if I do use the wrong hand to drink your health.”
“Enough of this, Jan,” said Theo. “You don’t need to do this. I know you are as afraid as the rest of us. You don’t need to let your worry come out in these torrents of insults. It’s not right. I know you don’t really think so badly of Trina or Dazmar.”
“Pah,” said Jandrin. But he was quiet after that.
“Don’t forget, Jan, where we are going,” said Kaspar. “There is no guarantee we will be going back to the palace at all.”
That only made Jandrin scowl more, and he went off into a corner with Jameth where they took out their lutes and played softly together.
“I will make no demands,” said Trina, quietly.
“Of course you won’t,” said Kaspar, smiling at her. She smiled back, wondering as she often had how the queen had birthed and raised such different children.
“I am sad for you both,” said Dazmar. “I know, perhaps better than anyone, how impossible these things can be.”
“You loved our mother,” said Theo. He had not mentioned it before, but it seemed as if Dazmar had admitted it now.
“No,” he said, shaking his head. “I cannot say that. I hoped I would have the chance to love her. We had all but grown up together, and I spent half my childhood with her and her brother. I was only waiting for her to be old enough to begin to court her. I had told her that, in our conversations. That was all there was, just conversations. She was happy, when I told her my intentions. She never made me any promises, and I never touched her, not once. But just before she turned eighteen when I could have spoken to her father, she was invited to the palace. Then the king chose her and that was the end for us.”
“And he banished you,” said Kaspar. “You lost everything and had to start again. You must hate him.”
“I don’t hate him,” said Dazmar. “Much has been forgiven me, so I forgive him. I cannot accept God’s forgiveness if I am not willing to forgive those who have wronged me.”
“That is hard to believe,” said Theo. “The Temple teaches, as you must know, that revenge is honour. To overlook a wrong is weakness.”
“Our Scriptures tell us that revenge is not ours to seek,” said Dazmar. “It is for God to judge. But look,” he said with a smile, pointing to Trina, who was drooping over her empty plate. “We are all tired, and there are many miles ahead of us tomorrow. We will talk again another time. Take this and read it if you like.” He handed Theo a small, worn cloth-covered book, a New Testament and Psalms in Kalath.
“Thank you,” said Theo, holding the book gingerly in his hands as if it was something dangerous.
Trina was glad for the day to be over. She was interested in what he had to say about his God, and she had wondered many times since they had arrived in Ahrania if this God of the Christians was the same God she had prayed to as a child, the same God who she had hoped could see her in her troubles and had kept her safe this far. But for now she could not keep her eyes open. She took off her Ahranian dress, barely caring who saw her, and crept onto one of the palettes in her shift. Theo was near; if she wanted to, she could have reached out to touch him. She didn’t though; it was enough to know he was there. But when the dawn came and she stirred, turning over and pulling the covers up against the chilly air that blew under the door, she saw that he had shifted closer and was barely an arm’s length away from her. She lay there, still half-asleep, watching him in the grey light. When he woke a little later and found her looking at him, he reached out his hand. In another world, in another life it could be like this, she thought, weaving her fingers through his. Just not this one.
There was another inn the next night, but after that, when they crossed over into Empire territory, they spent a night in an abandoned barn and another in the open, in the sparse shelter of a grove of trees near the roadway. The landscape was not very different to Ahrania, but the roads were better, the towns busier, and the people looked and sounded different. They stopped to eat and to rest the horses only a few times a day, and she was tired down to her bones when at last she lay down at night.
On the second to last day they passed a crossroads, one road leading west towards a town whose name they recognised on the signpost, the other leading over green hills to the east. Dazmar pointed it out to them.
“The way to Kalathan,” he said. “Not many people know this, but that road will take you to Fahlat, a small town on a river. That river feeds eventually into the Great River itself.”
“Really?” Trina was surprised. “The Great River that runs through Kalathan City?”
“The very one,” nodded Dazmar. “Kalathan is not as cut off from the rest of the world as you might have thought. There’s a market in Fahlat. You might be surprised at the things you can find there.”
Trina noted the landmarks as they passed the unmarked road to Fahlat. A patch of tall trees in a field, a long ditch a few feet from the roadway, a thicket of what looked like berry bushes on the opposite side. She was more than glad, later, that she had. Storing the information in her mind, she clicked at her horse and followed the others as they continued southwards. She could not know, then, that in less than a few days she would be at the crossroads again, and that she would thank God that she had paid attention.

Chapter 30
“My lord,” said Theo, bowing low. They were in an enormous echoing room, lined with rows of armed purple-and-gold guards. His brothers, beside him as he stood before the low platform on which the Emperor’s throne stood, bowed too; Dazmar and Trina hung back behind them. He had been all for coming straight to the palace in their travelling clothes when they had arrived the previous day, but now, in the midst of this magnificence, he was glad that he had taken Dazmar’s advice and visited the market first. He did not think that his dusty Ahranian robes would have gained him this audience. Cedric, it seemed, was not a man with simple tastes.
The room was far larger than the throne room at home in Kalathan. The very walls glowed with gold and the floor beneath their feet was an intricate pattern of glistening tiles. Just like the city of Cedropolis, this room was on a grand scale, everything bigger than it needed to be. The ceiling was arched and high, the windows taller than any Theo had ever seen. The Emperor stood before them, and as Theo bowed, something he had never done to anyone in his life before, he felt he understood a little of the awe this man held for the people of the Empire. Cedric, Lord of the Western Empire, Potentate of the City of Cedropolis and Emperor of all lands from the Alpine Mountains in the west to the Parsian desert in the east, had, of course, made them wait, for hours, until he would see them. Their weapons had been confiscated. Their seal rings (and perhaps their improved appearances) had been convincing enough to warrant an interview, and Trina had been right – it had not taken much more than that to convince him that they were who they said they were.
To the Emperor’s right was a young woman, perhaps Kaspar’s age. She sat on an upright chair on the platform, in a very stiff-looking dress of startling, shimmering emerald green. Her skin was white as the marble statues that lined the entrance to the palace, her pale hair swept up behind her head, her lips painted with something bright that made it look, Theo thought, as if they were stained with blood. She looked at them curiously, her pale blue eyes meeting his without apology as he noticed her. This must be Lydia, he realised, Cedric’s daughter. It was strange, to think this girl was a princess. He had never met one before.
“You bow to me, young man,” said the Emperor, tapping his chin with a jewel-laden finger. He was a tall man, sturdy and broad in the chest, older than Father, his iron-grey hair still thick on his head.  He was dressed in rich, gold-embroidered clothes and wore a gold wreath around his head, the metalwork of it stunningly fine up close. It had to be lighter than Father’s heavy crown, Theo thought, as he straightened again. “If you are who you say you are, I find that amusing.”
“This is your country, my lord,” said Theo. He found that if he spoke in the Old Tongue, with the adjustments of pronunciation that Dazmar had suggested, that his speech was similar enough to Empirian that he could make himself understood. He had expected that Dazmar would need to translate, but it was not always necessary.
“And what are you doing here, in Cedropolis? Of all the places I expected, at last, to meet members of the royal family of Kalathan, it was not here! The fact that you have walked into my palace like this is shocking to me, to say the least.”
“We left Kalathan in fear for our lives,” said Theo, after Dazmar translated. “We discovered there was a price on our heads and were forced to flee. We crossed the mountains into Ahrania, where we heard of the threat of war.”
“And now you have come to see me,” he said, a slow smile creeping onto his face. He turned to look behind him at Lydia, then back to Theo. Theo felt, under his gaze, like a child. Like a foolish, innocent child who had unknowingly stepped into a lion’s den.
“Come here,” said Cedric. Theo understood that and stepped cautiously up the three steps onto the platform. The Emperor put his finger under his chin, turning Theo’s face to look at him. Theo felt like a horse being examined by a buyer. He did not like it, and he fought the urge to pull away. “I think I believe you,” he said. “I cannot imagine why anyone would claim to be you, and although you are travel-weary and wearing clothes you must have picked up from the market, I can hear that you are not peasants. But it is rather amusing, as I said, that you should walk into my court claiming to be the princes of Kalathan. Why, not six months ago, I had a meeting in this very room with a charming man from Kalathan, a man with pale hair and blue eyes. He brought his aunt along with him. He was very charming, wasn’t he, darling?” Cedric turned to Lydia again.
“Very charming,” she said. Her voice was high pitched, slow, measured.
“Ring any bells?” asked Cedric.
“A man from Kalathan?” Dazmar translated but Theo was still puzzled. “As far as I know we have no diplomatic ties with the Empire.”
“Well of course you don’t!” Cedric’s voice rose, his tone mocking and impatient. “Not for lack of trying on my part!”
“We know nothing about it, my lord,” said Theo.
“Go back to your brothers now,” said Cedric, waving his hand dismissively and sitting down on the throne beside his daughter now. Theo obeyed, and stood beside them, his mind racing. “It is interesting, that you call me lord. So did this other … what was he? Not a prince. Not anything really. I think that bothered him somewhat. We had a very pleasant conversation about a possible change in leadership for your country. And I have to say that after all my fruitless efforts to try to get your father to meet with me or my representatives, the prospect of a more sympathetic monarch next door was very appealing to me.”
“Asnan!” Kaspar said, suddenly. He must have been following the Empirian too, Theo realised. “Does he mean Asnan?”
Theo was confused. Asnan, their cousin? His mother was the king’s cousin. He was next in line to the throne, after Maikal. He had pale hair and blue eyes. And his aunt? Who was his aunt?
And then suddenly, he understood. Asnan’s aunt was Shihazar. They had left Kalathan and been to see the Emperor, without the king’s knowledge. They had come to an understanding. Perhaps even an agreement. He had been right – Shihazar had been behind the pilgrimage and was behind the attempt to assassinate them. And it had all come from Cedric. No wonder their mother had told them to flee to Ahrania. But they had not known why, and now they had played themselves into his hands. A shiver of fear and dread ran over him.
“You?” he asked. “It was you who put the price on our heads? So Asnan could be king of Kalathan instead of Father or any of us?”
Cedric laughed, and Theo knew his suspicions were right. “Your father,” said the Emperor, coolly, “has refused to negotiate with me. He has refused every attempt at a discussion. For two years I have been sending emissaries, notes, gifts – one of my notes, sent back unopened, even offered my daughter’s hand in marriage to one of you! Every attempt I made to reach out, to find a way for both the Empire and Kalathan to benefit from trade in the East, was rejected without so much as an explanation.”
“What is he saying?” asked Jandrin, a scowl on his face. “He said something about Father! And what does Asnan have to do with any of this?”
“He’s the one who put the price on our heads, Jan,” said Theo, turning to his brothers and speaking in Kalath. “Asnan wanted us dead so he could be the Emperor’s puppet. Now be quiet, for all our sakes.” He was afraid. He had not expected the Emperor to be a threat to them, personally, and he saw now that it was foolish to have walked in so casually, all of them together like this. He turned back to Cedric.
“Our Father may have refused to negotiate,” he said, carefully. “But perhaps you will find that we are, under the circumstances, more open to it.”
“Ha!” said Cedric, a look of amusement on his face. “You will negotiate? Perhaps the sight of my daughter has inspired this!” he laughed, and so did Lydia, as Dazmar translated.
“No, my lord,” said Theo. He was not enjoying this. To joke, when the subject could not be further from amusing, offended him.
“Of course you will,” said Cedric, “now that I assume you have heard what I have had to resort to. My army is almost ready to invade. Any day now, your Father will feel the weight of my response to his insult.” He was no longer laughing.
“My lord,” said Theo, “if he knew the situation, he would not be so stubborn. Please believe us – we do not want a war. There can be a way, I am sure, for us to come to an agreement. My father believes that Kalathan’s independence would be threatened by opening it up to trade. But if he knew—”
“If he knew the might of my army, he might be singing a different tune,” said Cedric. “Do you not think that I know this? Do you think I want a war? Do you think I prefer the expense of an invasion to a civilised negotiation?”
“It can still be prevented,” said Theo. “If we give you our assurance that our father will negotiate, none of it needs to happen at all.”
Cedric was quiet. He looked from Theo to the other brothers, to Dazmar, to Trina, and back to Theo. “You think this sorry little visit can achieve that?” he asked.
“If we can promise you what you want,” said Theo.
“You’re not going to be much of a king if that is your attitude,” said Cedric, condescendingly. “If you happily offer whatever your enemies demand, Kalathan won’t last a day under your rule.”
“I would not have let it come to this in the first place,” said Theo, hoping he was making himself understood.
“Perhaps not. You are offering me … what? Full access to the Sapphire Road? No taxes and tariffs? No restrictions, no border controls?”
Dazmar had to translate the modern terms for Theo. He stood, his mind spinning, feeling more hopeless by the minute. How could he promise these things, the very things Father had been trying to avoid? How could he hand over Kalathan’s autonomy so casually? But he realised, as he thought it, that it was not his to hand over anyway. He was only the crown prince and he had no authority at all. All power was in his father’s hands. He could promise Cedric anything he wanted, but Cedric knew how it worked.
“I can promise that I will do my utmost to make my Father see …”
“Useless!” shouted Cedric. “How do you think a promise like that has any value to me? You want me to put everything on hold while you travel back to Kalathan City to talk to your father? In the meantime he will learn of our plans and we will lose the element of surprise. No, I would be a fool to accept your offer. Do you want to know what my plan was?”
Dazmar translated quickly, and Theo nodded. But he suspected he knew what he was about to hear.
“Asnan and his aunt offered to get rid of all of you. The Empire would invade Kalathan, the great size of our army scaring yours into a hasty retreat all the way to your capital. The grief-stricken Theoland, having lost his sons, on seeing the streets of your so-called holy city turn purple as my soldiers marched triumphantly in, would abdicate in favour of his nephew, a man who knows the wisdom of co-operating with the Empire. I thought that Asnan had done his part. He assured me that with the right funds it would not be a problem.”
“He did not count on us,” said Theo, clinging to his pride, as he felt all hope sliding away. “We escaped the Hazari.”
“That is impressive,” sighed Cedric. “It would have been very convenient if you had not. But there are more of you, aren’t there? Weren’t there six? I recall paying for six.”
“Only four,” said Theo, the lie sliding out of his mouth before he had a chance to think about it. This man did not deserve the respect of being told the truth. “Our younger brothers did not survive the difficulties of our journey.” He looked down, hoping the others would have the sense to play along. Cedric could not know that Maikal and Ben were safe in Ahrania.
“Pity,” said Cedric. “because I think know exactly what I am going to do with you. It might actually work out better, this way. You will be guests here, for a while. Royal guests!” He laughed, clapping his hands together. “And when the day comes, I will bring you with me, to Kalathan, to the plains beyond the Kirgiz pass. Isn’t that a wonderful idea, darling?”
Lydia nodded. “A very good idea, Father.”
Cedric continued. “If Theoland remains as stubborn as he has been in the past, you will be a useful bargaining tool. And I suspect that if this war means the end of Theoland’s reign, you might just be a more amenable monarch. Asnan failed in his task so perhaps he will not get his crown after all.”
He walked up to Theo and poked him in the chest. “Your father insulted me,” he hissed. “No one ignores the Emperor and escapes unscathed. He has already lost two sons and perhaps it will take the loss of more before he comes to his senses and realises that no one can stand in the way of the Empire and its triumph. Not Kalathan, not the damned Parsian rebels, not anyone. Kalathan will pay for his idiocy.”
“My lord, please,” said Theo. “Surely …”
“Lock them up somewhere!” Cedric called out to one of the officials on the edge of the room.
“In the prison, my lord?” asked the official, stepping forward. “The Ahranian and the woman too?”
“All of them,” said Cedric, waving his hand.
“Not in the prison, Father,’ said Lydia. “They are royalty, after all, even if they are as stupid as their father. What about the old tower?”
“Perfect,” said Cedric. “And besides,” he said, as he held out his hand for his daughter and she stood to join him, “it won’t be for long. Soon, boys, we are going to war.” He swept out of the room, Lydia on his arm.
Theo watched as the startling green of Lydia’s gown disappeared from the room. He turned to his brothers and Dazmar, who stood as shocked as he was. Jandrin was pale as a sheet, Jameth looked a little dazed, and Dazmar had his eyes closed, praying, probably, Theo thought. And Trina … but where was Trina? Theo’s eyes frantically searched the group as the guards advanced to lead them away.
“Where is the woman?” asked the official, realising too that she was not with them.
A horrified-looking guard appeared at the entrance, clutching his arm. “She said she needed to go out, so—”
“You took her out?” shouted the official. “And let her escape?”
“She said it was … a woman’s matter,” he said, looking so completely mortified that Theo almost felt sorry for him. “And then she stabbed me! The little vixen stabbed me and disappeared!” There was blood oozing from between his fingers.
“Find her!” yelled the official. “She can’t have gone far!”
In the confusion that followed, Jameth came up to Theo. “Don’t say anything,” he whispered out of the side of his mouth, as the guards began to lead them away. “She has my ring and I gave her the gold I had.”
“I don’t understand,” stammered Theo. “Where has she gone?”
“To warn Father, Theo,” said Jameth. “She’s going back to Kalathan.”

Chapter 31
Trina pulled herself up to her full height. The man in front of her was Empirian, and although she had a good idea of what he was trying to tell her, she did not understand a word he had just said. But Nasa did. She reached out and cuffed the boy on the ear.
“Tell me what he said!” she barked at him. They had agreed that there could be a little of that sort of thing if it was necessary. They had to keep up the pretence in order for Trina to get to Kalathan, and until that happened, Nasa would not be paid. So he rubbed his ear, scowled at her and translated. The man was not happy to rent a boat to a woman and a boy. He wanted to know who would row it. If it sank and they drowned, where would that leave him?
“I can make it worth your while,” said Trina. It had not been difficult, so far, to pretend to be a wealthy lady. She had even enjoyed it a little, or she would have if she had not been so worried for the princes, and for Kalathan. Whenever she needed inspiration for her act, she thought of that garish green princess in the throne room, looking down her nose at Theo, and the arrogance came more easily. Having Nasa with her had helped, a lot. In fact, she knew she would not have made it this far so quickly without him. Thank God for the bag of gold coins Jameth had passed her in the Emperor’s palace with his ring. She had only used one coin so far, for the clothes, the horses and a couple of inns along the way, and to tempt Nasa to come with her. Another one would be his reward as soon as she was back in Kalathan. Perhaps it was time to use a third.
The man’s expression turned from suspicion to interest. “My boats are my life,” he said, dramatically. Nasa translated quickly, rubbing his ear. He was small, about thirteen years old and much shorter than Trina. He was bright, though, capable of the acting she required of him, and his Kalath, learned from his exiled mother, was decent. It had been like a miracle, she still thought, that she had found him that first afternoon in the marketplace as she had dodged the soldiers who were looking for her, as her plan to assume a new identity had formed in her racing mind. She had heard him humming a Kalath song as he swept out a stall, and realised that her journey would be less dangerous, and more likely to succeed, if she had a translator and a companion. So here they were, only a few days later, at the riverside in Fahlat. If they could get a boat, they could be in Kalathan by the next afternoon, and in the city perhaps a few days after that.
“Is your life worth fifty silver denaros, perhaps?” she asked, trying to look as if she was confident about the sum. She had only two denaros in change from the first gold coin, but she suspected that the colour of her gold would not matter to the boatman. Kalathan gold went as far as any other kind.
“Fifty!” He laughed.” Not a centium less than seventy-five!”
“Hmm,” she said, relieved at his answer. “A large sum for the hire of a small boat. But I must get to Kalathan to see to my business there, and the road from Cedropolis is blocked by the blasted army.”
“The army?” The man looked concerned at Nasa’s translation.
Trina waved her hand. “Very inconvenient,” she said. “It’s full of soldiers and horses and carts of cabbages and pumpkins and sheep. This way is quicker. Even if you do make me buy your boat instead of hiring it to me like you should. But I am in a hurry.”
She slipped a hand into the front of her dress and drew out a gold coin as Nasa translated. It felt strange to do such a shameless thing in front of a man, but again, she needed to be someone else. A rich woman with business interests in both Kalathan and the Empire was not likely to be demure and modest. The dress she wore was lower than anything she had ever worn in her life, brightly coloured and full-skirted. The scarf she had draped over her head was silk, shot with silvery threads. No one would suspect she was the dull-coloured girl who had ridden into Cedropolis with the princes and Dazmar just a few days before.
The boatman’s eyes widened at the sight of the coin.
“That’s more than seventy-five,” said Trina, “but throw in a blanket or two and some food and we have an agreement. And you can have the horses, too. We have no further need of them.” She did not wait for Nasa to translate, but walked over to the boat, as haughtily as she could, as he hastily repeated the words to the very satisfied boatman and then followed her.
“He’s fetching the blankets and food, lady,” said Nasa, catching up with her. “It worked!”
“Of course it worked,” she said, crouching down to touch the wood of the small rowing boat. It all had to work; Kalathan’s fate depended on it, even if her heart felt as if it were made of lead at the thought of getting into this thing and heading out over the water. “I hope you are feeling strong, Nasa. It’s a long way down the river to Kalathan.”
The boy grinned. He was excited to see Kalathan, his mother’s country that he had never seen. His mother had died and his father had remarried, and he had been itching to escape his home too full of younger brothers and sisters and to find an adventure. He was having the time of his life, cuffs on the ear and all.
Less than half an hour later they were on the water. At first, in sight of the shore, Trina sat primly on the seat as Nasa rowed. She looked ahead and focussed on breathing evenly. There was no reason to think this was any more dangerous than riding a horse. If she didn’t think about the water and what might happen if they were to capsize then it wouldn’t scare her. But it was impossible, not to think about it.  Nasa did not have to row much; the current drifted them slowly downstream. But as soon as they had rounded the bend, Trina took an oar, and they sat side by side, pulling together as the sun began to dip in the sky. It helped, to be rowing. It distracted her from her visions of drowning.
“Will we row all night?” Nasa asked, cautiously. He was tired, Trina could see, and so was she. It had taken most of the morning to get to Fahlat from where they had spent the night, and then another few hours to figure out how it all worked, where to find the boatman and to come up with a plan. But it had all come together nicely, and if the information they had was correct, Kalathan was not too far away. This narrow river would flow into another one, and then another, and that was the Great River. An hour or two downriver after that and they would reach Dehras, only half a day’s boatride away from the city.
“No,” she said, wondering if it was safer to sleep in the boat on the water or to find a spot on the shore to spend the night. “We need to rest.”
“We should get to the shore, then,” he said. “We can sleep in the boat. It’s good you asked for those blankets. It can be very cold on the water at night.”
Trina nodded, pulling at her oar. She did not like the idea of sleeping in the open, alone except for this useful but very young boy. She closed her eyes and thought, for nothing more than a moment, of the last night before they had reached Cedropolis, of sleeping in the open with Theo beside her, their hands clasped together, the bulk of him reassuring against the overwhelming dark of the night. Tonight there would be no comforting presence. She had her silver dagger, still, in a clever hidden pocket in her skirt, and the little knife from the palace too, but it was not reassuring. Were there thieves on the shores of this river? Would it be necessary to sleep in shifts and keep watch? If someone stole her gold and the ring that would be the end of it. She had no idea.
“Are there … dangers, on this river?” she asked.
Nasa shrugged. “How would I know?”
“Do you think we should we be worried about thieves and robbers? Or snakes?”
“Snakes?” Nasa looked alarmed.
“I’m sure there aren’t any snakes,” said Trina, wishing she had not thought of it. “But we should take turns keeping watch.”
Trina took the first shift as Nasa curled up under one of the lumpy grey blankets that reminded her, unexpectedly, of the prison. She sat on the boat seat in amongst the reeds into which they had pulled the boat, the blanket pulled close around her. She wasn’t as cold as she had been in prison. She was better fed, that was for sure, and better clothed. She looked up at the stars and thought about what Dazmar had said about God, how his hands had flung the stars into space. She thought of how when she was just a little girl in the Temple, she had always hoped he was out there, that he cared for her, and how Dazmar had showed her Christian scriptures that said that he did. She closed her eyes and pulled the blanket close. Father, I am scared, she prayed, choosing to call him by a name that reminded her of unconditional love. Please help me to get there in time to warn the king.

Chapter 32
At first, the tower room had seemed large and pleasant, not like a prison at all. They had comfortable beds, a table to sit at and books to read, even though they were all in Empirian which only Dazmar could understand. They were brought plenty of food and most other things they wanted. The nights were still warm, and to sit at the large, barred window and look down over the bustling city was almost pleasant. They had Lydia to thank for their comfort, Theo supposed. It was certainly better than a cell.
On the second day, she came to see them. It was a shock, when the heavy door in the round stone wall opened and she appeared, in a gown as glaringly blue as the other had been green. There were jewels in her hair and at her white neck. As they bowed to her she stood still, perfectly composed, her blue eyes curious and … what was it? Calculating, perhaps, Theo thought. He could not decide if he trusted her or not.
“You are comfortable?” she asked, in her silvery voice, looking around the room. Dazmar translated as she spoke.
“Very comfortable, lady,” said Jandrin. “Thanks to you.”
“I wanted to look at you,” she said, sweeping her eyes across all five of them. “I have never met anyone from Kalathan before. Except for your cousin and his aunt, of course.”
“We have never met anyone like you, lady,” said Jandrin.
“Of course you haven’t,” she laughed.
“Why did you want to look at us?” asked Theo. He was upset and angry, anxious about Trina, burdened by their failure to prevent a war. He did not care if she thought he was rude.
She shrugged. “The only princes I have ever met are Balzir of Ahrania and the son of the Sultan of Parsia. One is ugly and the other is stupid.” She looked at Theo as if she was appraising him. “You are neither.”
Theo did not answer. He had understood before Dazmar translated. He did not like the way she spoke to him, and he was powerless to object.
“Don’t bother with him,” said Jandrin, stepping forward with a chair in his hands. “He is in love with an uppity peasant who has run away from him. Please, sit.” He put down the chair and gestured towards it.
Lydia seemed taken aback for a moment, then she laughed and sat on the chair. “Thank you!” she said. “How odd, to be in love with a peasant!”
“I think she bewitched him,” said Jandrin, smiling broadly at her.
Theo scowled at his brother.
“Fascinating,” said Lydia. “And where is this woman? Is she in love with you too?”
“I don’t know where she is,” said Theo.
“And of course she is in love with him,” said Jandrin. “He is the crown prince of Kalathan, and as you so aptly pointed out, he is neither ugly nor stupid.”
Lydia turned her attention to Jandrin. “What about you?” she asked. “Is this how they do things in Kalathan? Princes and peasants?”
“Oh no,” said Jameth, joining the conversation now. “We are supposed to choose, from the girls who are invited to the court. Suitable girls, you know.”
“Tell me more,” said Lydia, her eyes sparkling.
She stayed for an hour. The twins charmed her as hard as they could, and Kaspar, after his initial wary shyness had worn off, joined in. Theo went over to the broad sill of the window and sat there, apart, listening to her speak and then to Dazmar’s translations. He was catching more and more of the language all the time. He could not decide what he thought of this girl. She was beautiful; he could not deny that. Her features were delicate, perfectly proportioned, her skin smooth and unblemished. Her fingers, resting demurely in her lap, were white and soft. But looking at her hands only made him think of Trina’s, of her rough, work-worn fingers entwined with his. This girl had surely never washed a shirt or made a fire in her life. He looked away from Lydia’s blue-and-white brightness and closed his eyes, wondering for the thousandth time where Trina was. An uppity peasant. He smiled to himself. If that was what she was, he loved her for it.
“Do you have no brothers?’ he heard Jameth ask her. “You are the Emperor’s only child?”
“No brothers,” she said. “My mother died in childbirth and the woman Father married afterwards is barren. I am the heir.”
“You are the heir?” Kaspar was shocked. “A woman?”
“Oh yes,” she said. “Father can pass the throne on to whomever he pleases. That is the difference between an Emperor and a king, you know.”
“Really?” asked Jameth, his eyes wide. “And he chooses you?”
“He says so,” said Lydia. “Perhaps he will change his mind, but I think he wants me to rule after him, even if I am a woman.”
“And you want to?” asked Jameth, still incredulous.
“I don’t know,” she said, looking down at her lap, and for the first time since he had met her Theo felt a speck of sympathy. “Empress is a … heavy word. All the people, depending on me to rule them well. I am not sure I am up to the task.”
After she left, the twins could talk about nothing else. Theo sat back against the opening of the window, his head against the bars, looking down at the street. Yes, she was beautiful and clever and charming. He did not begrudge them the distraction. She returned a few times after that, bringing more books, a chess set, even a small lute and a wooden flute for the twins. Kaspar asked for paper to draw on and she sent up a pile of large sheets, and pencils too. But Theo did not want gifts from Lydia of the Empire. To be trapped in the room, to sit still and do nothing when Trina was out there, travelling alone all the way to Kalathan, when there was an army on Kalathan’s border growing larger every day and to be able to do nothing at all about any of it was so frustrating that he felt more than once as if he was going to lose his mind.
It was worst at night, when he lay on his bed in the silent darkness and missed Trina so much that it was like a pain. He felt her absence keenly, an emptiness in his chest that sometimes made it hurt to breathe. If something happened to her, would he even know? She could disappear, and he might never see her again. The brief words they had exchanged before going in to see the Emperor would be the last they had ever spoken to each other. It had all been so sudden. He hadn’t even been able to say goodbye.
“I can’t stand it,” he said to Dazmar one day during the second week of their internment. Lydia had caught on to the twins’ love of music and had sent more instruments. Theo had endured half a day of Jandrin attempting to get a decent sound out of a trumpet, and Jameth beating out rhythms on a horrible tinny drum. Kaspar seemed content enough to spend his time drawing and writing, filling pages and pages of his paper with sketches and stories. But Theo could not settle to anything. He alternated pacing around the room and staring out of the barred window at the city below, fuming, seething, raging inside.
“Theo,” said Dazmar, looking up from the book he was reading at the table. “You must find something to occupy yourself. Let me teach you some Empirian.”
“Jan!” shouted Theo, even though his brother was only a few paces away across the room. “If you don’t stop with that awful thing I will throw it out of the window! It will fit between the bars, even if you won’t!”
Jandrin tossed the instrument aside. “Yes, Theo,” he said, yawning. “Listen to Dazmar. You need to occupy yourself. Don’t take it out on us.”
“Learning Empirian sounds like just the thing for you,” said Jameth, putting down the drum. “Very useful. We should all try, so we can talk properly to Lydia. But I know I won’t be much good at it.”
Theo shook his head. “I can’t,” he said. “How can I think of anything else but Trina, out there somewhere, alone? And the war? I couldn’t.”
“Don’t worry about Trina,” said Jandrin. “If anyone can do it, she can.”
Theo stared at him in surprise.
“What?” said Jandrin. “I don’t like her, and I don’t approve of your scrambled brain when it comes to her, but she’ll be all right. She will find a way.”
“Thanks,” said Theo, briefly. “But it’s still dangerous. And she has that mark. When she’s back in Kalathan she will be back to being treated like dirt.” He stared out of the window again, remembering how he had, in the beginning, done just that. He had let her serve him, not even asked her name. He remembered how she and Uka had sat by that tiny fire alone. He closed his eyes, his mind full of regrets.
“Come and play chess,” said Kaspar, putting aside his papers. “That will help you take your mind off things.”
“I don’t want to take my mind off things!”
“We’ll play with you, Kaspar,” said Jandrin. “Both of us against you and we might have a chance. What do you think, Jay?”
“He’ll still beat us,” said Jameth, mournfully. “But we can try.”
The three brothers took the intricately carved ivory and ebony chess set to one of the beds.  Theo pulled a chair out roughly and clattered it loudly across the floor to sit down at the table across from Dazmar. “How can they play games now?” he asked, putting his head in his hands. “All they can think about is how pretty Lydia is, when her father has imprisoned us and could this very moment be invading Kalathan.”
“There are times when we are powerful, and times when we are weak,” said Dazmar, shutting his book. “You must learn to accept where you find yourself. There is nothing you can do now but wait.”
“I know,” said Theo, through gritted teeth. “That is what I cannot stand!”
“You could pray, perhaps.”
“Not to the God I know,” said Theo, looking up. “I used to worship and revere him. I used to feel confident that he was pleased with me and would bless me with victory and plenty. Now he has … shrunk, to nothing.” Dazmar was quiet, and Theo looked at him. “Is that what happened to you?”
“It is,” he said. “The Temple faith is very good at making people proud of themselves when things are going well and making them feel guilty and useless when there is trouble. You are expected to praise God for the good things and blame yourself for the bad.”
Theo thought about that for a while. “You are right,” he said. “I have not read much of the small Bible you gave me yet. Is that not how Christianity works?”
“No,” said Dazmar. “Christianity teaches that most hardships are a result of man’s turning away from God and looking to himself. And it teaches that God reaches out to us in our sufferings and offers us forgiveness and love. Like a father, welcoming back a wayward son.”
Theo was quiet again. “I want to know more,” he said.  “But I am afraid for you to tell me. I am afraid to read the Scriptures.” He leant back, folding his arms.
“Why are you afraid?”
“What if I believe it? If I do, I cannot be who I am. Without the Temple faith, I cannot be the king of Kalathan.”
“Why not?”
“Why not?” Theo was confused. “Because … because they are connected.”
“If you believe that the Temple faith is a problem then that connection need not continue. If you are the king, that could be up to you.”
“But that would mean that the throne would be separate from the Temple.”
Dazmar nodded. “That would be the logical conclusion, yes.”
“But the Temple gives authority to the throne.”
Dazmar shrugged. “Do you think it has always been that way?”
“Since the days of the conquerors. That is what I was always taught. But then I read, in the archives, about the other religions. The pagan religions.”
“The devilclaw curse? Sword worship?”
“How did you know?” Theo was astounded. “How do you know these things?”
“You are not the first to have asked difficult questions about the Temple and found the answers surprising, Theo. I did not want to believe that what I had been taught all my life was a lie. I did not want to believe that the founders of Kalathan had been manipulating and deceiving me, even from their graves. And I am not the only one. If we were free, I could introduce you to other people from Kalathan who reached the same conclusions that I did.”
“You said something about this in Ahrania. That it was a deception to subdue a conquered people.”
“That is my view on it. If that is what it is, then Kalathan deserves better. Kalathan deserves to know the truth.”
“My father would never understand,” said Theo, shaking his head. “He would never entertain thoughts like this.”
“You are not your father,” said Dazmar. “And if you believe the Temple should be disconnected from the throne of Kalathan, if you know your people are being led astray and deceived, you can do something about that.”
Theo nodded. “I know there are errors in the Scriptures. I know there are practices and beliefs that must change. But Christianity – I admit, Dazmar, that I am afraid of it. It is appealing, and your community in Ahrania seems to me like … like a piece of heaven on earth. But I am afraid of the power it seems to have over you and over your friends who risk their lives to preach it.”
“Don’t be afraid to learn about Christianity,” said Dazmar. “It will not force itself on you. It is an invitation which you are free to accept or refuse. Either way, it sounds to me as if you have already lost faith in the Temple. That will not change if you read the Christian Scriptures now.”
“I need to think about this,” said Theo.
“Good, then. Thinking is better than worrying.” Dazmar smiled, holding up the book he had been reading. “And when you have thought about it, come over here and we can read this together. It’s one of the gospels. You can learn Empirian and look for the truth all at the same time.”

Chapter 33
It turned out that Nasa’s lack of experience at things like keeping watch meant that Trina’s first shift was the only watching that happened that night. He fell asleep during his turn, and despite Trina’s feeling that she would not be able to sleep much, all cramped up on the hard floor of the little boat, she woke to the sound of birds and the gentle lapping of the water against the sand of the small beach. Nasa got a good scolding, and as they got going again, a lesson on how to stay awake when you had to. The conversation ended up with Trina telling an abbreviated story of her travels, about how she and the princes had fled from the Hazari and finally overcome them, and how they had travelled over the mountains and into Ahrania. He enjoyed the tale, and as Trina told it she wanted to laugh at how unbelievable it sounded.
“I am not sure that all that was true,” said Nasa, as they pulled on the oars together. “But it is a wonderful story.”
“It’s true,” sighed Trina, as the sun began to warm them up. “Sometimes I can’t believe it myself.”
There were a few other boats on the river, and they passed a few small villages. Early in the morning there were fishermen, and later just a few boats of various sizes moored to small wooden jetties along the western side of the river bank. They rowed a little but the current still carried them along. It was mid-morning when the ripples began to flow in different directions around them, rocking the boat a little and making Trina’s heart beat faster. She was getting used to being on the water, although the fear never quite left her, but this change in the water was unsettling. After a few minutes, however, her grip on the side relaxed as the boat flowed with the water into the bigger river, still coursing steadily on.
“Can you swim, Nasa?” she asked, wondering why she hadn’t before.
“Oh yes,” he said. “There is a stream near our home outside Cedropolis.”
“I can’t swim at all,” she said. “If this boat capsizes, I will drown.”
“If that happens, lady, you must hold your breath. You know how to do that?”
“Of course I do,” she answered, crossly.
“Then you kick, and move your hands, like so.” He showed her. “Push the water down, and you will go up. It’s simple, see?”
Trina watched him but did not try to imitate him. “One lesson won’t teach me,” she said. “I will drown.”
“If it happens, try to get to the boat, and I will come and get you. I promise,” he said, earnestly, and Trina could not help but smile. Taking on the role of her protector as well as translator appealed to him, she could see. She did not think much of his offer, but she was glad for it.
Late in the afternoon, the landscape began to change. Until now the banks of the river had alternated between sandy flat marshes, patches of reedy grass, and now and then a thicker patch of trees. But now the river began to widen, and the banks were steeper. And as evening fell, she saw ahead of them the clustered buildings and the haze of cookfire smoke on the eastern bank that could mean only one thing. Dehras.
“There it is, Nasa,” she said, putting down her oar, her skin prickling at the thought that after all this time she was back in her own country, unfamiliar as it was here. “We are in Kalathan now.”
“Really?” He peered ahead into the dusk. “Will we stay here tonight? Or perhaps you want to go on alone?”
“I think I should, Nasa,” she said, reluctantly. “Perhaps it is better for you to go home. I don’t need you to translate any more. We can get some food from the town and you could take the boat back to Fahlat. I could pay for a passage to the city for myself.”
“On my own?” Nasa looked concerned. “But … how will you convince people that you are a rich lady if you have no servant? I can speak for you, with my different accent. Won’t that help?”
“It will help,” she said. “But what about you? I can’t guarantee your safety.”
“Please take me with you, lady!” Nasa’s expression pleaded with her. “I want to see Kalathan City! All my life I have heard about it. I want to see the bridge, and the Temple and the palace. This is the adventure I have been waiting for all my life. Please, lady!”
“Of course, Nasa,” said Trina. “I would be honoured to have you. And I will pay you well. In fact …” She reached into her bodice and pulled out one of the gold coins. “You have earned this.”
Nasa’s grin was wide as he reached out for the coin. “Thank you, lady. But this is about more than money.” He put the coin in the pocket of his jacket and buttoned it up, lifting his chin and puffing out his chest with pride. “I am doing this for Kalathan.”
“For Kalathan,” smiled Trina, as the boat drifted nearer and nearer to the town. There was a dock, she could see, lined with boats of all shapes and sizes, and someone standing on it in the navy jacket of a local official, waving to them to come over. She took a deep breath. “God help her.”
Priests. Trina put her hand up to her mouth to hide her grimace at the strong smell of the man who sat before her. Just seeing one, especially a greasy-faced, wine-soaked one like this one made her shudder. She had not forseen that there would be border controls in Dehras, and she felt like an idiot for not thinking of it. She would have been more prepared. She would have come up with a better story – any story. But now she and Nasa had been ordered to get out of the boat and tie it to a pole beside the wooden jetty, and were standing under the shelter of a simple structure thatched with reeds that stood on a raised platform just a few paces away from the water. The area around the jetty was fenced off, and a locked gate stood between them and the way to the town. She had not known this, or she would have thought of another way to pass. But it was too late; she was standing in front of a fat priest again, who was asking them questions that she did not know how to answer.
“Your business in Dehras?” he asked in his oily voice. There were two guards, also, on either side of the booth, not particularly tough-looking in their navy jackets, but still. She doubted that she and Nasa would be able to jump back into the boat and row away without a successful pursuit.
“Trade,” said Trina, her mind racing, gripping her hands tightly in front of her so he would not see them shaking. “I am here to trade.”
“A woman, alone? Trading?” The priest looked at her as if she was mad.
“I am not alone,” she said, keeping her chin up and trying to speak in the same accent as the princes. “I have my servant.” She gave Nasa another cuff on the ear, just to prove her point. He kept his eyes on the ground. Well done, Nasa, she said to herself.
“To trade what?” asked the priest, noting something down on his paper. He peered past her at their small boat. “I see no goods in your boat.”
“I … plan to buy goods here, in Dehras, and take them to the city. To sell,” she said. feeling that it would be a miracle if this man were convinced by her bumbling lies. Her only hope was that he was as stupid as he looked.
He raised his bushy eyebrows. “And how, woman, do you intend to pay for these … goods?”
“I have money,” she said. “And I don’t see what business that is of yours.”
He put down his pen and leant back against his chair, which creaked loudly as he did so. “You are Kalathene?”
“Yes.”
“From where?”
“Gehaz,” she said, grasping at anything she could find in her memory. “I am from Gehaz. I have come from the north, to see the city.”
“Gehaz?” he said, sceptically. “So far?”
“It’s not that far,” she said, breezily, waving her hand.
“Not so far,” echoed Nasa. She cuffed him again.
“If you come from Gehaz, why have you not brought goods from there?” he asked. “And why is that boat stamped with the insignia of the Empire?” Trina looked behind her to where the boat rocked gently on the water. She had never noticed the circle of leaves, burnt into the wood. Her mind raced.
“The boat we left in – it sank,” she said. “A few days ago. It sprung a leak and sank. All the goods I brought from Gehaz – leather, sacks of walnuts, dried cherries – all gone. It’s all at the bottom of the river. Five thousand kronas worth.” She shook her head, trying to look as if she was very upset. “We bought this one from the people who rescued us. After … after the other one sank. I don’t know where they got it.”
“Your money did not sink with the boat, I presume?” asked the priest.
“No. Fortunately not. The Spirit of Plenty was with us.” She clasped her hand to her heart, hoping a show of religious fervour would endear them to him. But the priest hardly seemed to notice what she had said. His eyes were on her chest.
“Let me see your money,” he said. Trina seethed with anger. She turned around, her back to the priest, and dug in her bodice. Jameth’s ring was still there, and the gold coins in the bag. She managed to take out two without bringing out the others, and turned around again.
She held out her hand to the priest. “There,” she said. “Satisfied? With that, I plan to buy a new cargo and go to the city as I planned. You know it’s more than enough for a good cargo. I plan to double it in Kalathan City. The prices are higher there, you know.”
“Where did you get that?” The priest’s eyes goggled as he stared at the coins. He reached out his hand, but Trina pulled hers away.
“It’s mine,” she said. “My father is … the sheriff. In Gehaz. He is rich.”
“Your rich father sent his daughter alone on a boat, on a trading trip to the city? Your story is pathetic. I don’t believe one word of it.”
“Where else would I have got this money if not from my father?” protested Trina. “I, a woman, could hardly have earned it!” She laughed, looking at Nasa, who laughed too.
The priest stared at them for a while, his pen poised in his hand. “Give me your names,” he said, eventually.
“Uka,” said Trina, grasping at the first thing that came to her mind. She rattled off a surname. Nasa’s name she did not change, unable to think of anything else.
Trina picked up the bag that held her clothes and the rest of their food. “We would like to be on our way now,” she said, holding her head high. “Perhaps you can direct us to an inn where we can stay for the night?”
“Oh certainly,” said the priest, heaving himself off his chair. “You will need somewhere to spend the night.” He folded his arms. “I can help you with that. Show the lady and her servant to my boat,” he said to the guards.
“Your boat?” The relief Trina had begun to feel dissipated in an instant. One of the guards had grasped her arm, tightly, and the other had done the same to Nasa.
“Let go of me!” She said, beginning to panic. “We will find our own accommodation, thank you!”
“You have been travelling all say,” said the priest, rubbing his hands together. “It is almost night. Let me provide some hospitality, to the daughter of the sheriff of Gehaz.”
Trina looked wildly around her, but it seemed there was no one within earshot. And who would help them, anyway, against a priest?  She knew well how it was. To make an enemy of a priest was never worth the trouble he could make for you in the future. They were on their own. She felt hot tears rising and swallowed hard to blink them away. In a minute, she and Nasa had been shoved onto the deck of a large flat-topped vessel that wobbled terrifyingly in the water.
“Don’t worry,” said the priest, who had followed behind and now stepped onto the boat, surprisingly sure on his feet despite his bulk. “I am taking you to my friend who has an inn. Just a little way down the river. You will be very comfortable there. Don’t worry.” But he smirked as he said it and Trina did not believe a word. He wanted her money. She stayed where she was, crouched over, too afraid to sit up straight. The boat had no sides, and all around them the water, getting darker and blacker as the sun set, lapped against the sides, splashing over in small bursts as one of the guards picked up a long pole and pushed it away from the jetty.
“Curse you!” she cried, as they moved away from the jetty. “Curse you and all your kind!” She remembered her knife suddenly and reached for it, but even as she did, she knew she could not reach it in time. It was hidden in a buttoned-up pocket in her skirts.
“Now about that money,” he said, stepping up to her and grabbing her arm to pull her up. “How about you hand it over, woman. The coins you showed me and whatever else you have in there.” He reached out his hand to dig in her bodice.
“Never!” Trina hissed twisting away from his as hard as she could. But he only gripped her arm tighter, hurting her, making her cry out. If he got the gold, and Jameth’s ring, she would never make it. She knew, even as she struggled with him, the dreadful stench of him almost as bad as his steely grip on her arm, that if she lost Jameth’s ring and the gold then all would be lost. She might still make it to the city, she might stumble in with nothing but the clothes on her back, but she would never make it in time. Without the ring she would never be able to convince the king that she was speaking the truth. Taking a deep breath she lifted her knee, bringing it with all her strength up between the priest’s legs. He let go of her, shouting curses, then lunging again as she stepped back. What am I doing? she thought to herself, desperately, as one of the guards reached her and roughly grabbed her. There was no use in trying to fight off three men. There was no clever plan that could get her out of this situation. There was nothing behind her but the terrifying expanse of the water.
The priest recovered his footing and grabbed her arms again, this time twisting her left arm around. She could feel that her sleeve had moved up her arm, and even in the half-darkness her mark was clearly visible. “I thought so,” he said, spitting as he spoke. “I saw you reach for something in your skirt with the devil’s hand. Filthy devilclaw. The cheek of it, pretending to be a trader. Daughter of the sheriff of Gehaz, pah!” With one hand still twisting her arm so hard that she could not help but cry out again, he started to feel all over her skirts. “What else have you got there, devilclaw?” he panted. “What were you trying to get?”
Then Trina heard a shout. It was the other guard, lunging at Nasa, who until now had barely moved from where he had been thrown onto the boat. But he was too late – Nasa kicked out at the guard who held Trina, catching him in the knee and making him lose his balance on the teetering surface of the boat. He grabbed Trina’s hand as she stumbled, pulling her away from the priest, her foot almost slipping over the side.
“We’re going to jump, lady,” he said, twisting away from the guard’s clumsy attempt to grab him. “Don’t be afraid.” And the next thing Trina knew, Nasa had pulled her backwards with him, into the water. And she was under, her legs above her head, her skirts over her face, her mouth filling with water, the world suddenly terrifyingly, hideously quiet.

Chapter 34
She was alive. It was still hard to believe, a whole day after she and Nasa had tumbled into the water of the river, since she had believed with all her heart that she was going to die. She had survived the streets of Kalathan, the king’s prison, the murderous priests at the shrine, the Hazari and the desolate mountains. Even as she had done what Nasa had told her and held her breath, even as she had kicked and moved her hands, she had still believed that it was the end. Her mother and sister would never see her again. She would never reach Kalathan, never see Theo smile at her again, never hold his hand. It was over, and although she fought against it, she believed it.
But then Nasa was there, pulling her up, dragging her to the surface and holding her up while she gasped for air. He had yelled at her to kick off her boots, put his skinny arm under hers and had, like magic it seemed, swum away from the boat towards the opposite shore. She could hear the priest and the guards yelling at each other, but they were, incredibly it seemed at the time, not pursued. She was not worth the trouble, she thought afterwards. All the priest was sure of were two gold coins which were, for all he knew, at the bottom of the river. Catching them would mean one of them would have to get wet, and perhaps none of them could swim either. Whatever the reason, she was alive now thanks to Nasa, walking barefoot through a squishy marsh, as bedraggled and sorry-looking as she had ever been. But – she put her hand to her chest – she still had the rest of the gold, and she still had the seal ring. Even her silver knife, in the buttoned pocket, had survived the swim. Thank goodness for tight Empirian bodices and fancy buttoned pockets, she thought. If she had been wearing her loose Ahranian clothes, or even the brown dresses she had worn since the journey began, her life would have been saved but her mission would be over. As it was, she had no boat, no horse, no shoes and no food. But she had a knife, a ring, a bag of gold and a teenaged half-Kalathene boy. It could be enough, she still had hope, to get her to the city in time.
“I’m sorry, Nasa,” she said to the boy as they reached a small patch of trees and sat down, exhausted after walking for hours in the sun. “It wasn’t supposed to be like this.”
“It’s not your fault,” he said, leaning back against a tree. He looked so pale. She was used to being hungry, but he was just a boy and this had to be much harder for him than it was for her. “That priest – Mother told me about the Temple, but I didn’t know the priests were like that. He wanted to take your money and he hurt you.” He shook his head.
“It wasn’t the first time,” she said, gingerly fingering the bruises on her arm. “There might be good priests out there, but I haven’t met any yet.”
“Our priest is kind,” said Nasa, closing his eyes. “He visits us and prays with us when something goes wrong. When Mother was sick he sat with her until she died. He gave me my first testament and explained it to me.”
“Your priest? You are … a Christian?” Trina hadn’t known that there were Christian priests. There hadn’t been any in Dazmar’s community.
“My family is Christian, yes,” said Nasa. “My mother was exiled from Kalathan for being a Christian. I thought I told you that.” He screwed up his forehead as he spoke, his eyes still closed.
Trina was quiet. “Can you tell me about your God?” she asked, after a while. “I don’t believe in the Temple God. I haven’t ever believed in him, really. I think he’s an excuse for priests and kings to be cruel and get what they want. But the people I met in Ahrania believed in the Christian God, and I have wondered … I have wondered if he is real.”
“Of course he is real, lady,”’ said Nasa, opening his eyes for a brief second and then closing them again.
“Then why,” asked Trina, not really expecting much of an answer, “why does he let all this happen? Do you know? Why is there war, and persecution, and suffering?”
“That’s a big question,” he said, smiling faintly.
“That’s why I’m asking it.”
Nasa shifted against the tree. He is falling asleep, she thought, her heart breaking for him. “Lady,” he said softly, with a deep sigh. “It’s not that he doesn’t care, or that he can’t do anything. It’s people, isn’t it, who cause most of the problems. And it’s when we hurt that we know we need him. If he burst out of the sky and demanded that we worship him, then how …”
“Yes?” Trina wanted to know the rest of what he had been about to say, but she wasn’t sure he was awake any more. Just as she thought he was truly asleep, he spoke again, although his eyes remained closed.
“And he did something about it, didn’t he? Sending his son to die? It’s people, lady, who can’t see. People who don’t want to see, who don’t want him to be their king. Even the Emperor, he can’t … I’m just going to rest a bit.”
Trina smiled. His mouth fell open a little, and she let him be. He was worn out by the walking, the heat, the lack of sleep the night before. She got up, looking around her. Perhaps she could find some berries and nuts. If only they could make fire, she could find leaves and roots they could digest. They needed something to keep them going. As she searched through the thicket, she prayed again. She asked God to show her where to find some food. She asked him to help her understand. “If you are there,” she said aloud, stopping where she was, “and if you are really good, then I don’t think I mind your being my king. But I really have no idea what that means.” She stood, pondering this for a moment. And then, as she wondered which way to go next, she saw a flash of colour in amongst the dull green of the leaves. A fruit tree, she realised, feeling a shiver run through her body. And as she filled her skirt with bright, ripe apricots, she felt that something significant had happened. When Nasa woke up she would have more big questions for him.

Chapter 35
Again, Trina thought, gold had made things easy. She and Nasa had made it to Kalathan City, only three days after their meeting with the priest in Dehras. They had walked along the riverbank for the rest of the day, the day she had found the apricots, and come across a small village that evening – thankfully this time there were no priests, only friendly, concerned farmers. The last of the silver Empirian denaros had been all it had taken to get a meal, a bed for the night and some boots for Trina. She had not even had to produce a gold coin to pay for the boat trip from the village to the city, just a day and a half perched on a load of grain. And now that they were in the city, she knew where to go to break a gold coin, to buy what they needed, to sit at a stall on the street for a glorious half an hour introducing Nasa to the delights of roasted peppers stuffed with candied walnuts, bought at a stall at the side of the road and eaten sitting on the edge of the great canal, watching the river rush past below the bridge.
She gazed out over the city, wishing she could rest here longer, to absorb the strange sensations of being home again. This place, although she had never felt fully welcome here, was home. It was all she knew. It was all her childhood memories, it had raised her up. She felt tearful, more emotional than she had expected as she looked out at the aqueduct carrying clean water to the streets, at the curly spire of the Temple towering over the other buildings, at the familiar grey of the paving stones and the bustle of people speaking her own language. She breathed in the smell of cooksmoke and the aromas of street stalls, listening carefully for the soft tinkles of glass beads in the doorways of tea shops. She pointed it all out to Nasa, his wonder and excitement written all over his face. But they could not linger for long. There would be time, perhaps, to show him the sights another day. Perhaps.
As they walked along the muggy streets towards the palace, she was glad to be rid of her Empirian dress and its full skirts, although she had kept the bodice on under the more modest, less colourful Kalathene alternative. The bodice had kept the ring safe so far and she was not going to part with it. She had chosen a good dress, better than any she had ever owned herself before. She could not turn up at the palace looking like a street waif. Like a devilclaw low-life, she thought, very aware of the irony. But now – now was the important part. There was still an army gathering on Kalathan’s border, and Theo and his brothers were still prisoners of the Emperor. She was terrified to do it, terrified that she would not be beleived, but she was here and she had to try. It was time to go to the palace.
She stood outside the gates, pulling nervously at her left sleeve as she stood outside the gates. She had been here before, although not by choice. She could see the prison through the iron bars, she could see the guards pacing up and down outside. Would she still be there, she wondered, if none of this had happened? Nasa was still with her, determined to stay as long as she needed him.
“I will go home when your business is done, lady,” he said. “Until then – let me stay with you?” She had not the heart to refuse.
“What do you want?” The sentry at the gate spoke roughly, although she was heartened that he had at least asked.
“I need to see Sabine.” She had worked out this plan as they had drifted down the river. Sabine would recognise her and arrange for her to see the queen, not the king. It was the only plan she had.
“Sabine? From the palace? Why?”
“It is a personal matter,” she said, boldly. “Very urgent.”
“It may be urgent for you. That doesn’t make it urgent to me,” he said, raising an eyebrow.
Trina shrugged. “All right,” she said. “It’s urgent enough that I will offer you something. But when the queen hears of this she will not be impressed.”
“The queen?” The sentry looked sceptical.
“Yes,” said Trina, pulling a silver krona from her pocket and holding it out to him. “Tell Sabine that it is Trina, who went on the pilgrimage to the shrine. And give her this.” She reached into her pocket and brought out the little knife. She looked at it in her hand briefly, before she handed it over to the sentry. That knife had sunk into the leg of the priest who had tried to slit her throat, and had helped her to escape from the Emperor’s palace in Cedropolis. Sabine’s concern had helped to have her life. And now, she needed another favour.
The sentry eyed the coin. “Wait here,” he said, then turned around, without taking it.
Trina stood still, proud, but quaking inside. So much depended on this.
It was half an hour before the gate opened, before Trina and Nasa walked up the cobbled driveway that led to the palace, following a guard. She could not help looking at the prison as they passed it. She could see the little window she had stared out of so often, waiting and hoping for something to happen, for something to change. They followed the guard around the side of the palace, to a back door, where Sabine stood waiting, holding the little knife in her hand, her face a mask of amazement.
“Sabine,” said Trina, the relief of actually being here in the palace, so close to fulfilling her task, making her voice falter. “Do you remember me?”
“Of course I remember!” said Sabine in a tense whisper, taking Trina’s arm and pulling her closer, away from the guard and Nasa. “You were with the princes, when they left and didn’t come back! You and the other devilclaw girl. I gave this to you!” She shook the knife in Trina’s face.
“The other girl is dead,” said Trina. “But the princes are alive.” She reached into her bodice and pulled out the ring, clutching it in her fist and then holding it out for Sabine to see. The yellow stone glinted garishly in the midday sun as the ring rolled a little on her palm. “Please, Sabine,” she said. “You know what this is, don’t you? I must see the queen!”

Chapter 36
It was so odd, to be standing before the king and feeling a flash of recognition. He was so like Theo that despite the distaste she sensed, she could not help but feel some affection for him even as he scowled at her from the throne on the low platform in front of her. He was Theo’s father, and despite everything, Theo was loyal to him. It was already the evening of her arrival at the palace, but the king had only now agreed to see her. She had spent the afternoon in a beautiful bedroom again, after her visit with the queen. It had been so wonderful to give her the news, that her sons were all alive, that Maikal and Ben were safe in Ahrania, and that as far as she knew the others were in Cedropolis – not the best news she could have brought, but better than what the queen had feared, and better than what the rumours said. The queen had said nothing about her mark, although she had clearly seen it. She had listened to the whole story, and it had taken a long time to tell. Then she had left, told Sabine to arrange for Trina and Nasa to be taken care of, and promised to arrange a meeting with the king as soon as she could. And then, even though all Trina cared about was delivering her message, there was a bath again, the same jasmine and roses, the same new clothes, even the elephant comb. It felt a little like a dream.
But now she stood before the king, clean, nicely dressed, her hair braided, bursting to tell her news. She did not expect the same welcome she had received from the queen, but still – the scowl under the heavy gold crown was immediately discouraging.
“Let me see the ring,” he said to his wife, his eyes on Trina. The queen, standing at his side as he sat on his throne, handed it to him, and he stared down at it in his hand. He was quiet, for too long, Trina thought, but she stood patiently, waiting for him to say something.
“You have been with my sons,” he said quietly, lifting his head again, closing his fist around the ring. “You carried this with you all the way from Cedropolis?”
“I did, my lord,” said Trina. “As I told the queen, they are prisoners. And Cedric said he will take them to the border and use them to bargain with you if he has to.”
“And there is an army massing on our borders.”
“There is. I heard it, from the Emperor’s mouth. Two hundred thousand strong.”
“You?” The king looked at her as if she was a child. “You were in the Emperor’s presence?”
“In the Empire,” said Trina, looking him straight in the eye, “it is not considered a curse.”
“This is not the Empire!” roared the king. Trina took a step back, alarmed at the outburst.
“That does not matter now, Theoland,” said the queen. She knelt down beside the broad, intricately carved chair, clasping his arm. “Now you know the rumours are not true. Theo is loyal to you. He is not a traitor, and they are alive!” Her voice was choked with emotion.
Trina saw the king’s chest rise and fall. “They are alive,” he repeated. “In Cedropolis?”
“Maikal and Ben are in Ahrania,” said Trina, carefully. She was not sure how much to say to the king about this part of the story, the part that involved Dazmar. She looked at the queen. “They are on … a farm, with Pralin. They were very well when we left them.”
“They are all well?”
“I hope so,” she said. “And it was Shihazar, my lord, who paid the Hazari to kill us. She visited Cedric with Asnan. They took money from him to murder the princes. He promised them that when he had conquered Kalathan and he was rid of you and your heirs, he would make Asnan king. My lord, you must—”
“Do not speak to me like this,” said the king, his face screwing up with disgust. “You forget your place, girl.”
“My place?” Trina could understand that it was difficult for the king to hear these things from her, but she did not understand the way his feelings about her seemed to overshadow the news she brought. “My place is to bring you this news. Kalathan is in danger. Your sons are in danger! There are traitors in the palace!”
“This girl is … she is offensive to me,” said the king, to his wife. “You need to take her away.”
“Theoland,” said Nuria. “She has brought us the news we have been hoping for. We should be grateful. And you need to order Shihazar and Asnan’s arrest.”
“Shihazar,” said the king, shaking his head. “You are sure?”
“I am sure,” said Trina. “Cedric said it was about four months ago, early in the spring.”
“She did go away then,” said the king. He turned to his wife, shaking his head, his face grey as if he was going to be ill. “She was gone for two weeks, visiting a shrine, she said. When she came back – that was when she said we should send the boys on the pilgrimage. And I believed her.”
“Order her arrest, Theoland,” said the queen, her voice tight and strained. “You trusted her, and she did this to us. You must deal with her, now. And Asnan.”
The king called for a servant and gave an instruction. Trina stood quietly, waiting.
“They will pay for this,” he said, as the servant hurried off. “God will not let this betrayal go unpunished. They thought so little of our divine throne that they thought they could usurp it. She is … a demon!” He stood, suddenly, his fists clenched. “All I wanted was to show my devotion to God and to Kalathan. And you!” He seemed to notice Trina again. “If you had been sacrificed to the spirit then perhaps God would have been satisfied. You should not be here at all!”
“Don’t blame her,” said the queen. “She said that Theo and the twins prevented the priests from performing the sacrifice. It was not her fault.”
“This war has nothing to do with your devotion to God, my lord,” said Trina.
“NO!” shouted the king. “No! She dares to speak to me like this? I cannot speak to her, Nuria. Take her away!”
“What are you going to do, my lord?” asked Trina, her hands shaking now as she stood her ground. “Kalathan cannot withstand an invasion by an army of two hundred thousand. But this is where your isolation could be an advantage. Perhaps we are good for one big strike. If we put everything into one decisive attack, then Cedric might think he has underestimated …”
“And now you are a military strategist?” The king stood up now, his face red.
“My lord,” said Trina, feeling her face burning. “Unless you put everything you have into an attack, unless you take every man and every sword, bow and cannon you can muster to the border right now, there is no hope for Kalathan. I will stand here and offend you all day if that is what it takes to make you understand. I saw the army on the road. I looked down over a road so thick with marching soldiers they seemed like ants on a log. I heard the Emperor’s arrogant sneers about how he was going to teach you a lesson, how he planned to murder your sons and steal your throne from under you. Let that offend you, not me! Direct your rage at that tyrant in Cedropolis who wants to lay waste to your country, your country that you have sworn to protect!”
‘Get her OUT OF HERE!” roared the king. Trina stepped back, catching her breath. She had not meant to say all those things, but she had been through so much; she had nearly died to deliver this news to him and she would be heard no matter what it took. But it hurt, to feel his anger, to think that he might not heed her warning because of who she was.
“Take her to the blue parlour,” called the queen, as a uniformed servant stepped towards her.
“There is no need to touch me,” Trina said, holding up her hands. “I will go.” She looked at the king one more time. “It may mean nothing to you, my lord, but I am still loyal to you despite what you think of me. Theo is loyal to you, there is no need to doubt that, and although you tried to have me killed and you treat me as if I am less than human, you are still the king of Kalathan, and I will obey.”
“Theo?” cried the king, looking at the queen again. “She speaks of Theo as if she is familiar with him?”
“Go, Trina,” said the queen, pleading with her eyes. “Go. I will come to you soon.”
All the couches in the parlour were covered in blue velvet, and the carpet was an astounding work of art. Trina sat waiting, looking at the patterns in the carpet and the tapestries and paintings on the walls, trying to breathe evenly, tears pricking behind her eyes. She had done what she could. She could not help the king’s attitude towards her. She remembered how Theo had hoped that he would be able to change his father’s mind about devilclaws, how he had hoped there could be a way for them to be together, and swallowed away the lump in her throat. At least she had not let herself be taken in by Theo’s optimism. It was a good thing that she had not let him make her hope.
It was half an hour before the queen returned, with a tall man this time, a frowning, grey-haired, green-eyed man in tall boots and a red sash decorated with medals and honours.
“Jarridius,” said the queen, as Trina stood, not knowing if she should bow or curtsy or shake his hand. She tried to smile instead, and stand tall, as if she had nothing to be ashamed of. “He is the commander of the army. You need to tell him everything you told me, Trina. Everything.”
Nuria made as if to walk away, then seemed to change her mind and stepped forward to clasp Trina’s arms. “Thank you,” she said. “I don’t care what you are. I have never believed it was a curse. To me you are an angel. You have taken care of my children and brought me news of them. You are brave, Trina, and if he cannot see that, please know that I do.”
“Thank you, my lady,” said Trina. “I just hope we can do something to save them.  And Shihazar …”
“I will make sure that Shihazar does not get away with this. Don’t worry. Just tell Jarridius now,” she said, and to Trina’s amazement she reached out her arms and embraced her before she hurried away.
She spent the next hour with Jarridius, who, as he realised what she was saying, called in more men in sashes who sat around them, writing down everything she said. She focussed her mind and told them every detail she remembered, everything the emperor had said, everything she had seen on the road.
“Sir,” she asked, as she finished. “Can anything be done? Is it hopeless? Will the fighting reach the Southern farmlands, do you think? I have family there.”
“I am surprised at your interest, surprised at the details you have given us, surprised at your capability,” he said. “But not, as you might think, surprised at everything you have said.”
“What do you mean?”
“We have known for a long time that the Empire was planning something significant. That was the reason that the king was willing to send the princes to the shrine. And then, a few days ago, a man arrived at the palace gates saying he had a message from the princes. The king refused to entertain him. He did not have a seal ring with him, as you have.”
“Shazir? He made it here? But he did have a ring – he had Theo’s ring!”
“That is what he claimed, but he said that he was robbed along the way. I am sure you can appreciate that it was difficult to know if he was telling the truth. The king refused to see him but the warden at the prison thought I should know what he was saying. I met with him, and some of the things you have just told me I have known for a few days already.”
Trina sat back, shaking her head. “The king refused to see him? I can’t believe it.”
Jarridius shrugged. “It was not surprising. The man was, by his own admission, an exile and a Christian. The king is not fond of Christians.”
“I know that,” said Trina, feeling a stab of guilt. Perhaps she was a Christian now too, as well as a devilclaw. After what had happened with the apricot tree, she was not sure. “He is in prison?”
“I will make sure he is released, now that I know he was speaking the truth. But I did send word to the border after my conversation with him and our force is stronger now than it was a week ago. I am making preparations to leave myself, tonight, and I will advise the king to lose no time in joining me there without delay. It is a good thing you did not arrive a day later than you did.”
“And … is there any way we can defend ourselves?”
“Now that we can prepare ourselves, we have a better chance. We do not have an advantage in numbers. That is an unfortunate fact. But our physical position is advantageous … is this making any sense to you?”
“Yes, yes,” said Trina. “Go on.”
“We have other advantages. Trade with Mandaria has not been limited to trinkets and silk lately. We have large supplies of explosive powder, more than I can imagine Cedric has been able to accumulate since trade has slowed down. You know about the civil war in Parsia?”
“I do. Explosive powder – is that what they use for cannons?”
Jarridius nodded. “We have machines that utilize it more effectively than cannons. What we lack in numbers we may make up in superior weapons.”
“I was thinking about the bridge, at Sundtar. I don’t know very much about these things but if there is no bridge, the Empirian army could get a little way through Kalathan but no further than the river.”
Jarridius looked at Trina, his eyes wide. “You are suggesting that we destroy the bridge?”
Trina nodded. “Our army could lure them in and then destroy the bridge when they reach it. The explosive powder – could it destroy a stone bridge?”
Jarridius shook his head. “Forgive me,” he said. “Never in my life have I heard a woman suggesting strategies of war to me.”
“I am sorry,” said Trina, dropping her eyes. “I know it is not my place. I have brought the message and the rest is up to the king and the army. I just … I just so badly want Kalathan to withstand this. If the army crosses the river into Sundtar then the way is clear all the way to the city.”
“You are right,” said Jarridius. “On my long journey to the border I will consider your suggestions.”
“I should not have let myself get carried away. But thank you for listening to me. It is good to know there is hope.”
“Your information is very valuable, Trina,” said Jarridius. “We have a better idea of position now, and of possible timing. You have done well. And now, you must excuse me. I have a journey to prepare for. And as you have said, you have done your part. Rest now, and leave it in our hands.”
Trina sat back on the couch as Jarridius and the others left the room, feeling suddenly as if her body was made of lead. When Sabine appeared a minute later, to tell her that the queen had instructed her to take her to her room, and that she and Nasa were welcome to stay at the palace as long as they needed to, the relief was so great that she could not keep the tears back any longer. She had done it. She had made it to the palace, she had faced the king and the news she had brought was making a difference. There was going to be a war, she knew that now, and Theo and the others were still prisoners. But she had done all she could. Her task was over, and as Sabine put her comforting arms around her and led her up the stairs, to the same beautiful room she had slept in all those months before, the tears flowed as they never had before. She wept for the king, so consumed with hate and prejudice that he could not see what was good for Kalathan, for Shazir locked up in prison, for all the soldiers who would lose their lives, for the suffering that was coming. And she wept for Theo, for the memory of his arms around her, for the tiny hope she had that she would see him again. Oh God, she prayed, remembering the apricots on that day by the river. Have mercy on us. Have mercy on Kalathan.

Chapter 37
They had been in the room for three weeks when there was news at last. Theo and Kaspar stood by the window looking down at the street, where they could see there was a commotion. People were shouting, rushing to and fro across the cobbled street, papers waving in their hands. It was torture for Theo, knowing something had happened and having no way to find it out. When their meal was brought, Dazmar asked the guard what was happening. It felt like an eternity before he had finished speaking and Dazmar was ready to explain.
“It sounds as if Kalathan has won a victory,” he said. “To everyone’s great surprise.”
“Praise God!” shouted Jandrin. “The Spirit of Victory was with us!”
“He said that the king was there,” said Dazmar. “At the battlefield. He even met with the Empire’s generals before it all began.”
“What?” Theo was amazed. If Father was there, that could only mean that Kalathan had not been surprised. He sat down, hand over his heart as it pounded in his chest.
“Trina must have made it!” said Jameth. “She warned them!”
“She must have,” said Kaspar, excitedly. “Our army would never have managed a victory against the Empire if they had not known to expect the attack!”
“Father probably had spies,” said Jandrin. “He might have found out another way. Or maybe that Ahranian Christian got through somehow.”
Theo ignored him. “Tell us more,” he said to Dazmar.
“The Emperor sent fifty thousand men over the Kirgiz pass into Kalathan,” said Dazmar. “The cavalry charge went badly for Kalathan, but then … I couldn’t quite understand what he was saying. It sounds as if Kalathan had some kind of new weapon. Fire machines? I think that is what he said.”
“Yes, yes!” said Jandrin, excitedly. “Remember, Jay? We saw them, with Jarridius. Like long cannons that shoot balls of burning shot when you light the explosive powder inside. Deadly!”
“I remember!” said Jameth, excitedly. 
“But surely the Empire has every weapon that gold can buy?” asked Theo. “I am surprised, that Kalathan would have such an advantage.”
“But they haven’t been able to trade,” said Kaspar. “Remember? The explosive powder comes from Mandaria.”
“He didn’t say much more than that,” said Dazmar. “He didn’t know if the army has retreated back over the pass or not.”
“This is good news!” said Jameth, a broad grin on his face. “Long live Kalathan! We are saved!”
Theo shook his head. “No, Jay,” he said. “One battle does not win a war. If anything, this victory would have made the Emperor even more determined to subdue us. He did not send in his full force, remember.”
“But we can do it again!” said Jameth. “We can teach them another lesson!”
“Don’t you remember what the Emperor said?” asked Kaspar.
“What?” asked the twins, together.
“He will take us to the front and use us to bargain with Father,” said Kaspar. “A victory for Kalathan might mean the end of us. Father might have to choose between us and Kalathan.”
“Cedric wouldn’t kill us, would he?” asked Jandrin. “Surely not!”
“Of course he would, Jan,” said Kaspar. “He wants victory at any cost. He would not hesitate.”
Theo shook his head. “I don’t know, Jan,” he said. “I agree with Kaspar. The Emperor will do whatever he thinks he must to subdue Kalathan and get his way to the East. If that means sacrificing us, I doubt he would hesitate for a second.”
It took five long days in a covered wagon for Theo and his brothers to get to the battlefield. The Emperor told them nothing. There was no message about his intentions, no visit from Lydia, no news except what they could get from the purple-tunicked soldiers around them. They were simply bundled onto a wagon the day after they heard the news, with their hands tied in front of them, their feet hobbled together and shifts of soldiers guarding them every minute. Even at night when the convoy made camp, their hands were untied but their feet remained bound. Surrounded constantly by spears pointing into their faces, even as they slept, any thought of escape was impossible.
Five days of heat and jolting, of Jandrin’s constant complaining, of boredom and frustration and noise, of horrible food and the smell of all their combined unwashed bodies – when they arrived at last and Theo stepped out of the wagon, the sight of the teeming valley covered in tents and purple flags, swarming with men and horses and wagons was almost a relief. And besides – they had travelled over the Kirgiz pass. They had felt the winding uphills and heard the anxious shouting of the drivers as the horses and wagons negotiated the steep descent. They were in Kalathan again. Beyond this valley, Theo knew, were some low hills, and then the next valley and the town of Sundtar with its great bridge over the river. He had been there once, as a child, and had swum in the river with his brothers off the jetty at one of the summer palaces. And beyond Sundtar, it was mostly flat farmland and open plains all the way to the city. As he tried to stretch his aching legs and arms within the constraints of the ropes, an Empirian flag caught his eye, flying over a general’s smart tent, the golden eagle bright against the purple background. Was it just a matter of time before this flag flew over the palace in his home city? He shuddered at the thought. It was impossible to imagine that Kalathan could ever be anything other than what it always had been – independent, set apart, proud.
“This is it, then,” said Jandrin, as he stood beside Theo waiting for the others to emerge. It was late afternoon, the sun still high in the sky behind them. “We are in Kalathan, while there is still a Kalathan. Soon Cedric will turn it into a province and give it some awful new name. If he lets us live, we will all soon be speaking Empirian and eating pigs for breakfast.”
“Don’t say that, Jan,” said Theo. He shifted his stiff shoulders around, wishing he could be rid of the bonds on his wrists. It was humiliating, to be treated like this. It chafed, after a lifetime of being honoured and respected, to be pushed and ordered around, to be dirty and unkempt and smelly and have no way to do anything about it. Dazmar said that it would do him no harm to learn some humility, and that Christians did not see persecution and hardships as failure. Theo was beginning to understand many things about Christianity, but he had not quite managed to get his mind around that. He did not see yet how God could have a good purpose in making him sleep on the hard ground with his feet tied together.
Jandrin shook his head, looking around at the swarming activity that surrounded them. “Optimism will get you nowhere, brother,” he said, as Jameth, Kaspar and Dazmar appeared out of the wagon, blinking in the sunlight. “This is worse than I imagined. Our army will be useless against this, even if we do have fire machines.”
Theo didn’t have the confidence to disagree. And they were being prodded again, told to take the few possessions they had been allowed to bring and to follow the soldiers.
“It’s strange to think that Father is out there, somewhere,” said Kaspar, as they walked, looking out over the valley.
“It is,” said Theo. “And that he most likely doesn’t know we are here.”
“No. What do you think will happen, when the fighting starts?”
“I don’t know,” said Theo, shaking his head. “I think Cedric will attack soon, unless our army has retreated too far. I imagine he would like to get his army over the river. Once he does that he might try to negotiate. But you heard him – he wants to teach Father a lesson. He wants to force Father to agree to his terms. I don’t know how far he will have to go to achieve that. But I must be honest, Kas – I doubt there is another victory in store for Kalathan. Not with this force against us. If Cedric takes the bridge, he might be able to march all the way to the city.”
“How will he feed them all?” asked Kaspar. “They can’t possibly have brought enough food for all the time that will take.”
“They will take it as they go, from the people,” said Theo. “They must have enough for a short while, but after that they will take what they can get from the towns and farms along the way.”
“Do you think they will take the bridge?” asked Kaspar.
“I don’t know,” said Theo. He tried to picture the bridge, but he had only a vague memory of it.
“I am sure Father will not give up,” said Kaspar. “He will do what he can to save Kalathan from being marched all over like that.”
“I hope so, Kaspar.” Theo looked across at his brother. He looked ahead with such hope, such energy. Tomorrow, today even, could very well be their last day on earth. A battle or a negotiation – both could mean the end of their lives. Theo had considered this, many times since Cedric had mentioned it.
“Do you think,” asked Kaspar, softly so that the twins could not hear, “that if he has to choose – that Father will choose Kalathan over us? If the Emperor offers us to him in exchange for surrender, will he do it?”
Theo shook his head. “You shouldn’t have to be worrying about things like this, Kaspar. You are too young.” Theo’s voice caught in his throat as he said it. It was one thing to face death himself, but to think that his brothers might be killed was worse. He was so grateful that they had left Ben and Maikal behind in Ahrania.
“I feel years older than I was when we left home,” said Kaspar. “I am not a child any more, Theo.”
“I know,” said Theo. “You have proved that you are not. Many times over.”
“Tell me what you think, Theo. Will Father choose us, or Kalathan? I think … I hope he chooses Kalathan.”
“I hope so too,” said Theo, quietly. “I think Kalathan’s freedom is worth more than just our lives. I think that if Father is forced to surrender and we become part of the Empire, that Cedric will destroy our culture and our history and everything that makes Kalathan what it is. I know it’s not perfect but … it’s our home, and it’s worth fighting for.”
“It’s worth dying for,” said Kaspar, “to prevent that.”
“I do not envy him the choice,” said Theo. “Let’s hope it does not come to that.” He reached out to touch his brother’s arm. The ropes stopped him, though, and the ever-vigilant guards shouted out for him to keep his hands in front of him.
The Emperor had given orders that the princes be kept close to him, although they had still not laid eyes on him since the day they had walked into his palace weeks before. They passed his tent as they were marched away, a huge, ornate structure twice as tall as a man, all purple and gold just like the throne room at the palace. It was on the western side of a small rise, to protect the Emperor, Theo supposed, if anything happened close by. There were servants carrying furniture into it: carpets, beds, chairs, silver lamps. Theo lifted his bound hands to scratch his constantly itchy head as they passed. That life of luxury, the comfort and honour that had once been his, felt like a distant memory.
Later that evening, to their surprise after the weeks of silence, they were called to see him. After they had laid their few possessions down in the grass, under a rough shelter of poles and canvas, and after an unsatisfying meal of dried meat that had been boiled until it was only slightly more palatable than pieces of leather, they were marched towards the Emperor’s tent in silence as the sun set over the pass behind them. Theo held his head high, wishing again that he had been able at least to clean himself up a little. Water was rationed and there was none to spare to wash, so both their clothes and their bodies remained as dirty as they had been. He had no special desire to impress this man or anyone else; it was just difficult even to remember who he was when he knew he looked like a beggar. Jandrin and Jameth’s long hair was matted and greasy, their jackets stained, their boots still caked with mud from the last place they had camped. Kaspar’s filthy jacket was torn across the front, and Dazmar’s long Ahranian tunic was nothing like the pale white it had been when their journey had begun. It had not mattered, in the forest, and in Gehaz, that he had been dirty and dusty, unshaven and unkempt, but there had been no one to care, and they had been trying to hide their identity anyway. Besides, it had never been as bad as this. But now, facing this man, desperate as he was for his country, he wanted to be Theoland, son of Theoland II of Kalathan, not a dirty prisoner. But he gritted his teeth and bowed again as they were brought before Cedric, determined that he would not let this humiliation rob him of his identity. Like Trina, he thought with a pang, as he faced the Emperor. Imprisoned, cursed, sent to her death, yet never losing her confidence or her strength. But he could not think of her now. He had to keep his head.
Cedric was smirking. He was in full military uniform this time, his perfectly sculpted gold-tinted armour glistening, the wreath-crown still in place over his head, seated comfortably on a chair draped rich fabric. “Not so cocky today, princes,” he said, making a face and fanning the air in front of his face. “I barely recognised you. So a prince is only a man after all, subject to the same dirt and decay as anyone else.”
“An Emperor too,” said Jandrin, after Dazmar had translated, “if left to rot as we have been.” Theo glared daggers at his brother. This was not the time for Jandrin’s sarcasm.
But Cedric laughed. “For that, I will not choose you,” he said, leaning back and folding his hands. “I need one of you to come with me tomorrow, to show off to your father.”
Theo’s heart froze in his chest. One of them? He had not, in all his wondering, imagined that they would be separated.
“Yes,” said the Emperor. “You know – surrender on my terms or I slit his throat. I was thinking of the young one.” His eyes rested on Kaspar. “The rest of you can wait somewhere out of the way. If things don’t go my way I might need to … repeat the gesture.”
“No, my lord,” said Theo. He did not need the translation to know what Cedric was saying. “Please – he is only a boy.” He could barely get the words out.
“I have not decided yet,” said Cedric. “Either him or you; I am not sure which would be more effective. But before I decide, I have a question. Answer truthfully and I might spare your brother and take you.” He narrowed his eyes at Theo.
“Anything, my lord,” said Theo.
“I want to know, and you must not deceive me,” he said. He looked at his own translator, who stood at attention at his side. “Ask them, and make sure they understand the question, how many are in their father’s army.”
“How many?” asked Theo, when the man had finished.
“You heard him!” shouted Cedric, standing up suddenly. “Don’t feign ignorance. I need to know. You need to tell me how many men are waiting for us on the other side of those hills, in between us and that damned bridge!”
Theo looked at Jandrin in confusion. He did not know. But Jandrin, when had heard the translation, had an answer. “My brother knows more about old scrolls than he does about armies, my lord,” he said. “Kalathan’s standing army in peace time is twenty thousand. Recently, with the trouble on the border, we were aiming to raise forty thousand trained men but when we left a few months ago we had not reached anywhere near that target. If every able man in Kalathan were to be called up we could muster eighty, perhaps. Our people are scattered over large distances and many are nothing more than untrained farmers. My guess would be that there are less than thirty thousand, split over the two fronts, here and on the Parsian border.”
Cedric stood still, his arms folded, his eyes boring into Jandrin’s as he listened to the translation. After a while he spoke. “I don’t believe you,” he said.
Jandrin looked taken aback. “I am not exactly in a position to be trying to deceive you, my lord. At this point surely you know anyway …”
“I thought I knew!” roared Cedric. “My intelligence has seemed perfectly reliable until now. But last night …” He stopped, then turned and walked back to the draped chair. “I don’t need to explain this to you. I was hoping you would be honest and tell me your country’s true position.”
“I am being honest, my lord,” said Jandrin. He looked at Dazmar. “Tell him! I am not lying!”
“You are a filthy liar,” said Cedric. “A good one, but a filthy one. I was almost convinced there, for a moment. Theoland has been hiding an army from me; how he has done that I do not know. But last night my scouts saw it. They saw evidence, princes, that makes you damned filthy liars. Sixty thousand, at least, scattered over that plain outside Sundtar. Sixty!”
“That is impossible,” said Theo.
“It can’t be true” said Kaspar. “Unless…”
“Unless he has an ally,” said Cedric. “Has he been talking to Mandaria, then? Shutting me out and having tea with that moustachioed grandfather who rules in the East?”
“No, my lord,” said Theo. “We told you, Father has no ties or agreements with any of our neighbours!”
“You’re a good liar, too,” said Cedric. “You really do sound sincere. But it doesn’t matter, in the end, does it? We still outnumber him, and we have … well, we have you. But enough of this now.”
He clapped his hands, calling to a servant at the door. Then he walked up to Kaspar, reached out his hand and dusted off the shoulder of his torn jacket. “I have decided. We’ll keep the heir and the pretty boys for now and take this one. But I think he needs a bath first, or his daddy won’t recognise him and that won’t help me at all. Take him away.”
Theo stepped forward to object, but Cedric held out his hand. “Don’t bother, prince. I have made up my mind.” He smiled as the servant took Kaspar’s arm and began to lead him away. “Clean him up. We ride to battle tomorrow, and he comes with me.”

Chapter 38
It was around noon the next day that they began to hear the sounds. The army had begun to move at dawn, and Dazmar and the three brothers trudged along at the rear, still tied up, still guarded, Kaspar’s absence like a terrible weight making it difficult to breathe, let alone march. “What is that?” asked Jandrin, when they heard it. It was like a faint roar, almost as if there was a great wind ahead of them.
“Battle,” said Dazmar, dully. “It’s the sound of battle.”
As they continued it grew louder, clearer, more terrifying. Ahead of them they could see little, for the ground rose up slightly and still all that was visible was the dense mass of men and horses moving relentlessly forward, the white plumes on the soldier’s helmets like a shimmering feathery sea. But then, as the sounds began to separate themselves, as shouts, cries, clashes of metal on metal and great, loud booms became distinct, they reached the crest of the hill and saw what they had been hearing.
It was hard to take it in. They kept walking, prodded on by the soldiers as they stared. “Kalathan!” breathed Theo, recognising the flags dotted at intervals across the plain before them, the dark red of the Kalathan standard against the hazy horizon. The sight of it caught him somewhere in his chest. Even though on the standard was the sword, the symbol of the Temple which he had come to distrust, this was his land and those were his people, suffering and dying to defend themselves and their country.  Between the advancing army and the Kalathan line was a moving mass, a horrifying squirming mass of men and horses, glinting strangely as weapons, harnesses, and helmets flashed intermittently in the sunlight. He was too far away to focus on anything, and as they advanced down the rise he could not see as much. But one thing he could not fail to see: the fire machines. Every few minutes there was a boom and an arrow of flame shot out from behind the Kalathan lines, soaring unbelievably high over the battlefield, then rushing down again to land in amongst the Empire troops, exploding on impact. The volley was relentless. Patches of fire and blackened grass dotted the plain, and as they got closer there were sounds that Theo knew were the screams of wounded men and horses. He had expected more order, more form in the Empire’s lines, but the fire and explosions were clearly having the desired effect. There was, it seemed, an endless supply of men, but these weapons were tipping the balance.
“Surely they aren’t taking us further?” asked Jameth, staring around. “We could be killed by our own army!”
As he said it, the soldiers with them shouted something to each other and stopped, pointing away from the columns of men still snaking down towards the battle. They spoke to each other across the brothers, something about the Emperor’s orders, Theo thought. And then they were moving to the side, out of the column, away from the battle towards a tall standard that had been planted in the ground.
“He says we are to stop here,” said Dazmar, as they were pushed down onto the grass beneath a pole from which a purple flag flew. “They were told to look for this standard and to stay here with us until further orders.”
“Here?” Theo could see that Jandrin was panicking. “Here, with all of this happening so close?”
“He said he needs us close,” said Theo.
“This is a nightmare,” said Jameth, shaking his head as he stared ahead. “And Kaspar is out there somewhere too, with Cedric.”
Or he isn’t, thought Theo, the dread that had torn at him all morning surfacing again. He looked at Dazmar and saw sympathy there. Dazmar knew it too – if there was a battle happening, it meant that there had been no negotiation. Or a failed one.
Suddenly there was a whistle overhead, and Theo looked up to see an arrow of flame land barely a hundred paces ahead of them.
“God Almighty!” said Jandrin. “The range of these things is unbelievable!”
“It’s not safe here,” said Jameth. “One of them could hit us.”
“Of course it isn’t safe, Jay,” said Theo. “It’s a battlefield.” He put his head down on his knees. That arrow had killed people, there was no doubt of it. He had killed four men since he had left home; he had lifted that poor devilclaw girl’s bloodless body into her grave and he knew what death looked like, but this was more than death. This, he thought, hearing screams now, the smell of burning flesh filling his nostrils, was hell.
They sat there for hours, until the heat of the day began to subside. It seemed as if Kalathan was gaining ground, but the frequency of the fiery arrows was slowing down, and still Empire troops poured over the rise onto the plain. There was, to their left, a line of trees that seemed to stretch down the side of the plain past the Kalathan line. If they could only get away from the soldiers, Theo thought. If they could get into those woods, if they could get hold of a few weapons, they could make their way past the battle to their own side. But there was no moment in that whole awful afternoon that he didn’t have a spear pointing into his face. Another ball of flame had landed and exploded, even closer, and the brothers huddled together now, powerless in their bonds, the spears of their guards never more than a foot away from them, powerless to do anything but sit, and wait.
Dazmar prayed, and even in the chaos he tried to comfort them. He seemed so calm, his concern for them more than himself. “Ask forgiveness,” he said to them. “Trust God, trust that he loves you. If our time is almost over, there is another world waiting. Be ready for it, boys, be ready to meet the real Lord.” Jandrin ignored him, Jameth listened but said nothing, and Theo tried to do what he said, to trust God. For a time he thought he felt it, God’s compassion for them even in this horror, but then he remembered the Sword of Kalathan, the Spirit of Victory, his own doubts and failures, and felt that he, and perhaps all of Kalathan, was being punished for his faithlessness. It was bizarre, too, as Kalathan held its own against the Empire, that victory in this battle could mean death for them. And then he heard a whistle that was louder than the others had been, closer, and the sky above him was lit up with fire. For one hideous moment he held his breath, sure that it was his last.

Chapter 39
Jameth’s scream echoed in Theo’s memory long after he heard it that first time. It was all confusion for a while, as his pulse beat in his ears, as the silence following the explosion gave way to the awful noises of pain and panic. Jandrin was yelling, leaning over Jameth who lay sprawled on the ground, and as Theo blinked his eyes and looked around he saw two of their guards lying still where they had stood just seconds before, and another running away. He stumbled up from where he had fallen, amazed that he did not seem to be hurt at all, looking around wildly for something to cut the ropes that bound his hands. Kneeling beside one of the fallen soldiers, he pulled his bonds over the sharp point of the spear lying at his side, trying not to look at the mangled body, and he was free at last. He picked up the man’s dagger and turned to his brothers, and all he saw was blood. There was blood all over Jandrin’s hands, gaping wounds in Jameth’s arm and shoulder, and a piece of something, like a twisted shard of metal, lodged in the side of his chest.
He knelt in front of them, hacking at the ropes, trying not to let his eyes move up to Jameth’s wound, trying to block his ears to Jandrin’s panicked shouts. He freed the twins’ hands and feet, looking around for Dazmar but not seeing him. There was more whistling, and another explosion close by. “We need to get out of here!” he shouted, grabbing at something, anything he could find to hold to the wound. “Get him up, Jan!”
Jan pulled his brother up, and as he did Theo saw Dazmar. He had been lying behind Jameth, and he was dead. A few seconds ago he had been right there, talking, praying, his hand on Theo’s back, comforting him. Now – there were flames licking at his tunic and he did not stir. His eyes were blank, staring, dead. A sob rose in Theo’s throat even as he knew he had to leave him there. The battle had reached them, it had freed them, and they had to get away. That one thought, in the midst of all the chaos, was clear. He looked up, past Jandrin who was holding Jameth up, to the woods, a hundred paces or so away. There were patches of fire wherever he looked, and enough confusion and chaos that he felt sure, even in his shock, that there was a chance they could make it. The soldiers who had been guarding them were dead or gone; it was every man for himself, and this was their chance.
Theo grabbed his bag from the grass and what weapons he could from the fallen soldiers. As they stumbled away, he picked up more, a bow from a man lying impossibly twisted beside a burnt patch of grass, a knife lying next to the hand of a soldier who would never use it again, a sword wrenched from under the belly of a fallen, suffering horse. Jandrin pulled Jameth along, stumbling on as fast as they could. At first Jameth, delirious with shock and pain, screamed and cried like a child. But Theo could not blame him. His was not the only such sound on the battlefield. Theo could still, years later, close his eyes and remember the sounds of dying, crying men. If he had not been clutching the weapons and the bag and running for his life, he would have blocked his ears.
By the time they reached the trees the sounds had faded. Theo had used the sword, to threaten a soldier who shouted at them to stop, but otherwise their flight was unchallenged.  Jameth was quieter now, breathing hard, still whimpering, and when they were alone at last, deep enough into the trees that the sounds of the battle were muffled in their ears, they laid him down against a tree. “It’s all right, Jay,” said Jandrin, kneeling beside him. “You’ll be all right.”
“Please, get it out of me,” said Jameth, looking down at his chest, his voice panicked, pleading. “Please, Jan, take it out!”
“I …” said Jandrin, looking at Theo, his face even more pained, Theo thought, than Jameth’s. “Do we just pull it out?”
“We must,” said Theo, kneeling too, dreading what he knew he had to do. He dug in his bag and pulled out a shirt; dirty as it was it would have to do. He ripped off a piece using the dagger and his teeth, then without hesitating or warning Jameth he grabbed the piece of metal and pulled it out. Jameth screamed again, and Theo shoved the piece of shirt onto the wound.
“Press here, Jan,” he said, feeling as if he was going to be sick. “Until it stops bleeding.” If it ever does, he thought, wiping the blood off his hands onto his clothes. He sat still for a moment, taking shuddering breaths, as Jandrin did as he said.
“I’m sorry, Jay,” he said, trying to wipe his forehead on his sleeve without getting blood all over his face. “We need to move down the lines as soon as we can.”
“How can we?” asked Jandrin. “He can’t run!”
“We can’t stay here. When things calm down again, we cannot be here. We must stick to the trees and move down until we get past the Empire’s lines. We can find Father. If we get to our army lines there will be a hospital tent, and healers. Focus on that.” He grasped Jameth’s other arm. “We have to bandage you up and then move. Can you do that?”
Jameth nodded, his eyes closed, tears streaming down his cheeks, his face twisted with pain. Jandrin was silent for once, holding the piece of shirt to the wound. Theo got to his knees to look at Jameth again, turning away and breathing deeply to stop himself from being sick when Jandrin lifted the cloth to show him. There were chunks of flesh missing from the top of his arm and the side of his chest beneath his shoulder. Theo could see bones, white and flecked with red.
They had to hold Jay up as they bound his arm flat onto his body with the rest of the shirt. Blood still seeped through, and Jameth’s face was so pale that Theo was afraid he was going to pass out. “Come on,” he said, standing up. “We must go.”
They took turns to hold Jameth up by his good side as he stumbled along, weaker and weaker with every step. Every now and then he would fall to the ground, crying and begging them to stop. Sometimes they did for a while, but they all understood that they had to keep moving. Their only option was to get as far as they could, past the Empire’s army. It was, Theo knew, Jameth’s only hope. By the time it was properly dark, they were all but dragging him along, the cloths by now soaked through again with blood.
“Jay!” cried Jandrin, as his brother suddenly became a dead weight beside him. He laid him gently down on the ground, fighting to catch his breath.
Theo knelt down and bent his ear to Jameth’s mouth. “He’s still breathing,” he said, looking up and around them for any sign of soldiers. Seeing nothing but shadowy trees in the almost complete darkness, he sat back and wiped his brow with his sleeve again. His back ached, his feet ached, and he was so thirsty he could barely speak.
“I think the bleeding might be slowing down,” said Jandrin.
Perhaps because there is nothing left to bleed, thought Theo, but he did not say it. “I feel that we might have gone far enough,” he croaked. “But I don’t know how to tell.”
“It’s so dark,” said Jandrin. “I know we must keep moving but we can hardly see anything.”
“Let’s rest for a while,” said Theo. “Maybe it will do him good.” They lay on either side of their brother, just where they were. Theo closed his eyes and tried to think about how far they might have come. There was just no way to know. It felt as if they had been walking for hours.
“Dazmar is dead,” he whispered to Jandrin. “Did you see?”
“I saw,” said Jandrin. “There was something in his chest, probably straight through his heart.”
“I didn’t know we had weapons like that,” said Theo.
“I did,” said Jandrin, so quietly that Theo could barely hear him. “But I never dreamed they would be used against us.”
Theo was woken by the butt of a spear shoved into his chest. “Oi!” said a voice, calling out to someone behind him. “Got some here!”
“Deserters?” called a voice. “We got us some dirty cowards, have we?”
“No, no,” said Theo, stumbling to his feet. He rubbed his eyes, trying to focus. It was still dark, and he could barely see the outline of the man in front of him.
“I didn’t say you could get up, sheep turd!” said the man, shoving at Theo so he fell to the ground again. As he did it, Theo realised what he had heard, and he almost wept with the relief of it. Kalath. Kalath! The crude insult was by far the most wonderful sound he had heard in weeks.

Chapter 40
It was not easy at first to convince the men that they were not deserters. But there was no time to argue, and when he looked back Theo thought it was strange how easy it had been, in the dark, to remember who he was, to say his name with confidence, to assert his authority and begin to give orders. Jandrin still had his seal ring, and even if it meant little to the men who had found them, it was all that was needed to convince their officer that they needed to be taken to Jarridius, right away. And then, suddenly everything was different. Jameth was rushed to the hospital tent, and Jandrin went with him, refusing to leave him even for a minute. There was a blanket around Theo’s shoulders as he was ushered into a comfortable tent, with carpets beneath his filthy boots still crusted with dirt and blood, a cup of steaming tea in his shaking hands, a bowl of warm water to wash, and then, like something out of a dream, there was Father, embracing him even in his bloody clothes, weeping. Theo’s eyes stayed dry. He still felt numb, and anxious to do what he could now to resolve all of this.
“Father—” he said, his voice sounding unfamiliar even to himself. And after that – what could he say? So many things, and at the same time nothing at all.
“Oh Theo,” said the king, stepping back. No crown, here at the battlefield. Only a slim circlet over his forehead, even at this time of the night. “You are alive. Praise God!”
It was good, to see Father. Despite everything, the burden Theo had carried since he had found out about the prospect of war felt as if it had diminished slightly. Father was here, and he was doing what he could for Kalathan. So far it seemed as if the army was holding its own against the Empire, and he was not alone in his desperate desire to save his country. Now that he was here, no longer a prisoner, there was power to do something.
“I am alive,” said Theo. “Jameth—"
“He is in the best hands,” said the king.
Theo nodded, swallowing back his fear. He had done what he could for his brother and now he could focus on all the rest.
“I never imagined this, Theo,” said the king. “There has always been trouble, and the pressure has been increasing over the last few months, but this has been such a shock.”
“Cedric said you refused to negotiate.”
“I was a fool. If this is the result, I was a fool. But I had no idea, Theo.”
“It is not too late,” said Theo. “We must negotiate with Cedric.”
“He has Kaspar,” said the king, rubbing his forehead. “He sent a message this morning, but it was after we began the strike. I … I did not reply. It was too late.”
“You have not heard from him since then?”
The king shook his head.
“Did they retreat?” asked Theo, realising that he did not even know what had happened.
“Not really,” said the king. “When night fell, they asked for a ceasefire.  But their advance could begin again any minute.”
“You must send a message, Father,” said Theo, urgently. “You have the advantage now. You need to tell him that you will negotiate.”
The king shook his head. “I don’t know what to do, Theo!” he said. He rubbed at his forehead, his face contorted with anguish. “If we negotiate, what does that mean? What will it mean for Kalathan? How can I let him have his way?”
“You don’t understand, Father,” said Theo. “He is arrogant and proud but all he really wants is to open up the trade routes. If we begin a negotiation in a strong position, he might be satisfied with just that and take his army home. We can end this, Father, and save Kaspar.”
“And what will that mean, Theo, for Kalathan?” The king’s face was desperate, still. “How do I know how much to give him? How do I know he will not destroy us if we step back now? That army, Theo, the men just keep coming, they keep streaming over that hill—"
“He will negotiate, Father,” said Theo. “I really think he will. But we need to do it now. He will not want to compromise, but he is afraid – he thinks our army is bigger than it is. He thinks you might have made an alliance with Mandaria. If you offer him what he wants now he will not push for anything more.”
“Mandaria?” The king looked confused. “An alliance?”
“He thinks you have an army of sixty thousand waiting for him if he continues the advance. His army is bigger, but we have the advantage of being on our home ground. His supplies cannot last forever if we delay him with such a huge force.”
The king’s eyes widened. “It worked?”
“What worked?”
“The trick. The trick that girl suggested to Jarridius. She said she read it in a book!”
“What girl?”
“That girl who came to warn us, that awful devilclaw girl. She said to tell every soldier to light three fires each when it was night, in sight of the enemy. That way they would think there were more of us than there are. I thought Jarridius was out of his mind to listen to her. I can’t believe it worked.”
“Trina,” said Theo, feeling a vain hope rise in his chest. “She’s not … here, is she?”
“Of course not,” said the king. He looked appalled. “To bring bad luck to a battlefield – I would never do that, Theo! As far as I know she stayed in the city. I hope I never see her again.”
“But she warned you about the invasion, Father! She travelled across Kalathan alone to warn you! Don’t tell me we would have won that first victory without her!”
“Theo,” said the king, impatiently. “Let’s not talk about that now, please. It is completely irrelevant how we were warned. You think Cedric … he might give us favourable terms? You think he might agree to trade privileges and leave Kalathan alone?”
“He might,” said Theo. “But we need to do it now, Father, before he gets his army over the river and before he realises the true size of our army. We can’t beat them. The numbers are too vast. And I noticed the fire arrows were fewer.”
“We barely have any explosive powder left,” said the king. “We cannot sustain another attack or defend ourselves for long if he strikes again.”
“Let me do it, Father,” said Theo, suddenly. “Send him a message, now, and say we are ready to talk. Tell him to bring Kaspar. I have even learned some of his language. Let us do it, together.”
Theo realised with a jolt that he was holding his father by his arms now, almost shaking him. He did not want to do it, but listening to the king now, realising how little he understood about Cedric’s position, he knew he had to. And it sounded as if Trina, from wherever she was, had given them the advantage again.

Chapter 41
Dear Trina
I know you are far away, but to write to you makes me feel as if you are near. I am back in Kalathan, at the battlefront, and Dazmar is dead. Kaspar is in Cedric’s hands and Jameth might be dying. I feel numb, Trina. I cannot rejoice over the one or mourn over the others. Perhaps when it is all over I will feel something again. The only thing I feel right now is longing for you, for your counsel and your arms around me.
I have seen Father. I know that you spoke to him and that he was likely dreadful to you. At least I know that you reached Kalathan safely. You are a wonder, Trina. I cannot imagine how you did it and I look forward to the day I will hear the story. I am sure you were brave and clever and terrified. But you made it, and I thank God for that.
Theo
It was morning. Theo had been to see Jameth where they had moved him to the king’s tent. There were priests hovering around him, and Theo had hardly recognised his white face against the sheets. He was in a fitful, restless sleep, and his hand when Theo picked it up was cold as ice. “They say he has lost too much blood,” said Jandrin, who had barely left his side and looked only slightly less pale and ill than his brother. “All we can do is wait and hope there is no fever. But he knows I am here. He knows I won’t leave him.”
Theo left them, pushing his worry aside for the moment. He had to concentrate now on the war. A message had been sent to Cedric, and although Theo had slept less than an hour, he felt strong. He was clean again, blessedly clean, shaven, and dressed as he had been in his old life. It felt so good to have a bow on his back again, even if it was hardly likely to be necessary at a negotiation. The stiff jacket with its high collar, the tall leather boots, the cape edged with fur, a circlet of his father’s on his head over a light turban, the smudge of kulal under his eyes – it strengthened him somehow, to know that he looked like a prince of Kalathan again and not a prisoner. But he would never be the same, he thought, as he mounted a tall horse and rode beside Jarridius and the king towards the agreed meeting point, halfway between the camps. The Theo who had existed before the journey began did not exist anymore. He had killed, he had suffered, he had fought. He had loved. He had lost too, more than he could bear to think about yet. And it was not over. Now he needed to use a weapon more powerful than any sword or fire machine. He needed to use his words, in exactly the right way, to talk Cedric out of another attack, to convince him to return Kaspar unharmed and to end all this suffering. And he had to talk to his father too, before it was too late. He was dreading it, but there were things that needed to be said, and soon.
“There is something I need to tell you, Father,” said Theo, as they rode towards the meeting point under the red and silver Kalathan standard, surrounded by armed guards. The king was in his shining silver armour today, a spiked helmet over his turban instead of a crown. “I know it will seem unimportant to you right now, but it is very important to me.”
The king looked over at him in surprise. He looked tired, his eyes red and his face pale after the eventful night.
“This journey has changed me, Father. I am not the same person I was when I left home in the spring. If you want me to come home with you and to take up my place again as your heir, I have conditions.”
“Conditions? What are you talking about, Theo?”
“There are some things that need to change. Things concerning the Temple.”
“I know about Shihazar,” said the king. “I know about her betrayal. I was wrong to believe everything she said, and I will carry that guilt for the rest of my life. But Amrak is no longer head fatir, and she and Asnan are in prison. When this war ends, things can go back to the way they were.”
“No,” said Theo, shaking his head. “I was not talking about Shihazar. I am talking about devilclaws.”
“Devilclaws?” The king almost spat out the word. “What does that have to do with anything?”
“By your own admission, Father, Trina has helped us, and I haven’t even begun to tell you everything she did for us along the way. There must be no more unlawful imprisonment. No more marking. It’s nothing but an old pagan superstition and I can prove it to you when we get back to the city. There is no Devil’s Claw curse and there never was.”
Father was angry. “That awful girl was with you all this time, Theo, and I can see it – she has done something to you and got into your head somehow. That’s what they do, devilclaws, they manipulate you and deceive you. You can’t trust them! It’s not natural, son, the way they are, and it never will be! The marking – that’s all just for the protection of everyone else!”
“You trusted her enough to have taken her advice and benefited by it.”
“We can talk about this later, surely, Theo,” said the king. “Devilclaws are cursed. Everyone knows that. It’s in the Scriptures!”
“You sent Trina to be sacrificed to the Spirit and she lived, Father. She is not cursed. She lived to bless Kalathan, not curse it. And if you do not agree, now, I will not go in there and talk to the Emperor. Unless you agree now, I will refuse and you can speak to him yourself.”
The king stared at Theo in shock. “You can’t be serious, Theo. You have had a difficult time and you have not slept …”
“I need your word,” said Theo. “I am serious.”
“All right then,” said the king, looking almost afraid for a moment. “I will agree to review the laws. Your mother has always been soft on them and it must have rubbed off onto you. It goes against my judgement, against everything I know about the curse, so I will just have to hope that you will change your mind when we get back to the city.”
“Good,” said Theo. “But there is more, Father. If we emerge from this victorious, I will not praise God for it. I will not perform a sword ceremony or a sacrifice. And when we get home, I will not worship at the Temple.”
“Theo!” The king pulled his horse to a halt. The guards and Theo had to stop too, and after the horses were settled the king spoke, his face flushed. “How dare you say such things? The fate of our country hangs in the balance and you are speaking like this? How can you refuse to honour God if he helps us?”
“Because I don’t believe he helps us,” said Theo. “Father – have you ever left Kalathan? Have you ever seen the world outside its borders?”
The king stared at Theo, his face still red. “I have not,” he said, his voice restrained and tense. “You know I have not.”
“There are things you don’t understand, Father. If I begin to talk about this when we get home, if I try to explain later when this is all over … I know you won’t listen to me. Things will go back to the way they always were, as you said. You need to know now, that I have lost my faith. I still honour you and I will obey you. I still revere you as my king. But these two things – you must understand them now. And you must let me have my way.”
The king stared at him, his face white. “It is blasphemy, Theo. God put me on the throne and he will do the same for you.”
“We might agree on aspects of that, Father. But I will not worship in the Temple. Never again.”
The king was silent, his furious gaze boring into Theo’s head. Theo was reminded of when he was a child, when he knew he had done something wrong and Father was waiting for him to confess. But this time there was nothing to admit. Eventually he spoke. “You will go to Cedric and negotiate as you said. We will talk about all this afterwards.”
“No,” said Theo. “Unless you agree I will not speak to Cedric.” He felt his hands shaking on the reins. He had not meant to give his father this ultimatum now, but as they had ridden out, as he had imagined that this could be the end of the war and the beginning of a return to his old life, he had realised that he had to say it now or nothing would change. He did not like to put this pressure on his father, but he knew he had to do it.
“I order you to do it,” said the king. “I order you to stop this nonsense.”
“I will refuse. You can do the negotiating and get Kaspar back yourself.”
The two men stared at each other, both determined not to give in. The horses stamped at the ground, eager to continue. Theo sat patiently and listened to the sounds of the horses, the quiet cough of one of the soldiers, the distant buzz of the camped armies, and he saw the moment that his father gave up. He saw it, the tiredness, the defeat, and he knew that he had made the right decision in insisting.
“You will make him give Kaspar back to us?” said the king.
“If he still lives, I will try, Father.”
“Do that, Theo, and I will agree to your conditions. Even though it pains me to think what might have prompted this.”
“You must agree now, Father.”
“All right!” The king raised his voice, then took a deep breath and spoke low again. “I agree. Let’s keep going.”
“Thank you,” said Theo, as the king clicked to his horse and began to move again. “I hope someday you will understand.”
“I doubt it,” said the king, turning his back to his son and riding on.
The meeting point was a hastily erected canvas shelter in the middle of an open field. The purple and gold standard of the Emperor flew above it, and Theo could see Cedric himself standing under the shade in his gold-tinted armour, his arms folded, as they approached. He strained his eyes, looking for Kaspar, but he could not see him. There was only Cedric, a few generals and one other, a small person in a dark cloak seated on a draped chair. As they drew closer, he realised with surprise that the small person was Lydia, her pale hair braided tight around her head, no garishly coloured gown today.
The king and Theo dismounted, left their weapons at the threshold of the shelter and ducked underneath. Cedric stood up, scowling at Theo. “You?” he asked. “How did you get away?” Theo was pleased. So Cedric had not known that they had escaped. Things must still be chaotic on the other side if he was unaware of it. Until this moment, Cedric had assumed he still had three more princes waiting to be used for bargaining.
“Kalathan’s fire killed our guards,” he said, speaking in halting Empirian, “and spared us.” Not all of us, he thought, thinking of Dazmar and Jameth. But Cedric did not need to know that. “This is my father, Theoland II of Kalathan.”
The king and the Emperor faced each other. “At last we meet,” said Cedric, looking the king up and down. Except for the turban and the kulal that the king wore, they did not look very different to each other, Theo thought, as the translator who had accompanied them repeated Cedric’s words. They were a similar height, both broad-chested and strong in their armour, both foreheads deeply lined under their shining helmets. For a moment Theo could not think how they were different. Both fought for their countries, both had been stubborn and proud. And cruel too. But Cedric was the aggressor here, he reminded himself. His father had been unwise, but he had not marched a massive army into a land that was not his own. He had not kidnapped anyone to use as pawns in a play for power.
“I cannot say that it is a pleasure,” said the king.
Cedric did not seem bothered by this response as the translator spoke. “My daughter, Lydia,” he said, gesturing towards her where she stood now at his side.
Lydia, to Theo’s surprise, stood up before the king, dropped her eyes and bent her knee. “It is an honour to meet you, my lord,” she said. As she looked up, she met Theo’s eyes and a look passed between them. Perhaps he had imagined it, but it was a look of something like sympathy, even complicity. It was certainly not the look of proud contempt he had seen in the palace that day they had first met. But there was no time to dwell on it. They all sat now, on the draped chairs, Theo and his father facing Cedric and Lydia.
Cedric spoke first, to the king. “I hope you realise now that this all could have been avoided, Theoland, if you had responded to my requests to meet with you.”
“I had no reason to meet with you.”
Cedric laughed. He held out an arm, sweeping it towards the direction of the previous day’s battle. “Here is your reason! You could have prevented it all.”
The king held his head high as he listened to the translation. “You invaded our country, Cedric. You cannot blame me for any of this.”
“We are here to negotiate,” said Theo, addressing Cedric. “None of us wants there to be any more fighting. My father understands better now, after I have explained it to him, why the trade routes are so important to the wellbeing of everyone, including Kalathan. We are prepared to make some concessions.”
“Concessions?” Cedric laughed. “I have your son, Theoland,” he said to the king. “I want surrender, on my terms.”
“Bring him out, then,” said Theo. He had expected these hard tactics from Cedric, but he could see the king was shocked. “We cannot negotiate unless we know he is alive.”
“All right,” said Cedric. He turned and called to a guard. “Bring him out!” A flap at the back of the shelter was pulled aside and there was Kaspar, alive, well, even cleaned up, although his hands were tied and there were soldiers on either side of him, holding his arms. Theo heard his father choke back a sound as he saw him. Kaspar began to move forward, but the guards restrained him.
“Not yet,” said Cedric. “There will be time for family reunions when you have surrendered to me.”
“I am interested to know what you mean by that,” said Theo. “And also interested to know why you think we should do such a thing after you have suffered two defeats at our hands.”
“Defeats!” shouted Cedric, as soon as the translator said the word. “You have not defeated us!”
“The first battle ended in a retreat,” said Theo, calmly. “And yesterday we gained ground. You cannot deny that, when you have the proof standing in front of you. You kept my brothers and I far from where the fighting began, but it reached us. And it was Kalathan’s fire that freed us.”
Cedric was silent for a moment. “I have the boy,” he said, after a while. “And you know the size of my force.”
“We have our fire,” said Theo. “Your numbers mean nothing if you cannot advance. It’s time to stop this talk of surrender.”
“Your fire cannot last forever,” said Cedric.
“Not forever,” said Theo. “But long enough.” It was not the truth, but Theo did not care about that. He had no doubt that Cedric would lie to him without blinking. But he made sure not to look at Lydia.
“All right,” said Cedric. “I will listen. Tell me what you have in mind.”
“I heard you, when you told us about how important trade is for the Empire.” said Theo. “If your economy collapses, that would cause instability for the entire continent. Kalathan has been isolated and until now that has been good for us. But we are willing to agree that the Sapphire Road should be opened, for everyone’s sake.”
“You are?” Cedric looked suspicious. “You will open it?”
“Hand over my brother,” said Theo. “And you have our word. We have more to discuss but if you give him to us, we will open the road, no matter what happens.”
“On what terms?” asked Cedric.
“We will talk about that after you release Kaspar.”
“We will talk, and then I will hand him over,” said Cedric.
“No,” said Theo. “Unless you release him there will be no negotiation. We will continue to defend ourselves against your advance. Give us Kaspar or your army has another day of burning explosions ahead of it.”
“You are bluffing,” said Cedric. 
“I don’t think he is, Father,” said Lydia. She looked squarely at Theo, and he steeled himself to look back without blinking.
“Are you willing to bet a day of our fire on it?” he asked.
Cedric was quiet. He looked over at his generals, then back to Theo. “All right. Release him,” he said, quietly.
Theo watched as the guards untied Kaspar’s hands. In a minute Kaspar was free and walked calmly over to them. The king stood and clutched at his arm, but Theo was glad that he restrained himself further. They needed to stay focussed.
“Go outside, Kaspar,” he said. “Take two of the guards and go to the camp.” Kaspar nodded, rubbing at his wrists. As he left, Theo caught a look between him and Lydia, one that confused him. It was not as obvious as a smile, but it was something close. But then he was walking away towards the horses. No one spoke as he mounted a horse and rode away, two soldiers on either side of him.
“Now we talk,” said Cedric. “You will open the road but that is not all I want. And don’t even think of going back on your word. There are worse things I can do than kill a hostage. And don’t think for a moment that I will be easy to please.”
“Neither will we be easy to please,” said the king, lifting his head high. “We serve the Spirit of Victory. Trade is one thing, but we will never surrender our holy land to you.”
“I don’t want your silly land!” said Cedric, raising his voice now. “Do you think I want the bother of it? I don’t care about your swords and spirits and your holy damn shrines!”
The king began to interrupt, but Theo put his hand on his arm. “Wait, Father,” he said. He turned to Cedric. “We propose a trading zone. A designated trading zone that will include the length of the Sapphire Road. There will be few controls and very low taxes, less than one per cent of traded value. There will be uncontested access for traders to Mandaria as well as the roads to the kingdoms in the Indus valley. Beyond that zone, nothing changes. The Empire will not leave an occupying force anywhere in Kalathan, and any citizens of the Empire living in or passing through Kalathan will be subject to our laws and justice. Our citizens in the trading zone will not be enslaved or interfered with in any way.”
“A trading zone,” said Cedric, tapping his fingers together. “Interesting. You have been thinking about this.”
“I have been thinking about it,” said Theo, his eyes narrowing. “While I sat like a stone in your tower, while I rotted in the back of a wagon on the road, while I stumbled and suffered through the woods trying to find my way back to my own side, I was thinking about it. This must never, ever happen again.”
“These taxes and tariffs,” said Cedric. “I can’t say that I like the sound of those.”
“Kalathan does not need wealth,” said Theo. “But there must be tariffs to acknowledge that the road still belongs to Kalathan. We will use the revenue to maintain it and ensure its safety for traders.”
Cedric rubbed his chin. “I am not quite satisfied yet, although I like the idea of this trading zone. I want an apology and an admission of guilt. I want my own people guarding and controlling the trade routes, not yours. And I want thirty thousand gold pieces to pay for all my trouble in getting us to this point.”
“You go too far, Cedric,” said Theo, feeling his chest constrict. He felt, suddenly, drained of hope. “Kalathan will control the road. There will be no apology and certainly no payment.”
“Have you forgotten what I have out there, Prince?” Cedric’s voice was calm, but Theo did not like the flash in his eyes. “You saw it, I assume. Don’t play with me. Don’t think for a moment that I have come all this way, that we have done all of this simply for you to offer me a ticket to cross your little country, on your own terms – something you could easily withdraw at any moment and leave me back where I started?”
“We will draw up a treaty. You will have our word.”
Cedric shook his head. “You will open up that road. But it will not be so easy to get rid of us, Prince. I want that apology and that money, or we have no agreement.”
“Then we have no agreement,” said Theo, his heart sinking in his chest. He was not tempted for a second to agree to the demands. To admit guilt would be a lie. To pay that price would be worse, and to walk away so cowed and defeated would open Kalathan up to more aggression in the future. Even to stop the war now, he could not do it. He looked at his father and knew that on this, they agreed.
“Then go back to your troops and the last of your explosions,” said Cedric. “You have your brother. I don’t believe you can maintain the assault the way you have. I suspect that you have put everything into your defence so far and you have nothing left. Go back to your men and get yourselves ready. Cedric, Lord of the Western Empire, Potentate of the City of Cedropolis and Emperor of all lands from the Alpine Mountains in the west to the Parsian desert in the east, does not come to a negotiation and walk away with less than he brought.”
“Well, neither does Theoland of Kalathan,” said the king, putting his hands on his knees and getting up. “At least I have my son, and our pride.”
“Come Lydia,” said Cedric, standing up and putting out his hand to her. “This is over. I hope you have learned from these Kalathenes how not to negotiate with the Empire.”
“I have learned plenty, Father,” she said, taking his hand and standing up. “Until we meet again,” she said to Theo and the king.
Theo squinted into the bright morning sunlight as he strapped on his bow and sword again. “All is not lost, Father,” he said, as he put his foot in the stirrup and mounted his horse again. “Kaspar is safe and as soon as we get back, we must meet with Jarridius. I think I know what we can do.”

Chapter 42
Dear Trina
I have seen the Emperor and Kaspar is safely back with us. But Cedric has refused to accept our terms and insists on our humiliation. I wish I could talk to you. Where do we draw the line between saving lives and saving Kalathan’s dignity? Sometimes I think there should be no line; we should always choose lives. But then there is the future and the unknown consequences of defeat. Everything has a cost. I want to know what you think, Trina. But Jarridius told me what you said to him before he left. It is a good plan, and we might have to put it into action. Even from so far away you are helping us.
Jameth is still very ill. His wounds are festering now and his fever is raging. The healers are all priests and they make me think of you. Everything makes me think of you. If you were here, you would take better care of him.
Love Theo
Theo looked out from the tall loft of the Temple at Sundtar. It was high enough that he could see the bridge and the wide river snaking away to either side. It was beautiful, the bridge, its wide stone and brick arches spanning the water effortlessly. Right now it was swarming with soldiers, marching over it quickly in neat, straight lines, retreating from the camp on the other side into the town, which had already been evacuated. Tall wooden structures had been hastily erected for archers, and he could see the heavy wagons that housed the fire machines too, lined up in orderly rows on the banks. He was a little too far away to see them but he knew that there were masons on it too, working at planting explosives. It was such a terrible shame, that it would have to be destroyed.
“I can’t believe we need to destroy it,” said Kaspar. “It must have taken years to build.”
Theo nodded. “It’s the only way. And it has to be soon. The attack could begin any moment. I wish they would move faster.”
“I still can’t believe Lydia,” said Kaspar, looking down at the note in his hand for the hundredth time.  “I suppose she is a traitor to her own country. I’m glad she did it, for our sake, but I just don’t like to think that of her.” He looked down at the piece of paper, the note that she had slipped into his pocket as he had been brought to the meeting place. Kaspar had not understood it but he knew what it said now. So did Jarridius, and it had helped them to plan what they all hoped was the end of this war. Father is convinced your fire is running out, it said. He is hoping to push through your lines into Sundtar and beyond. But supplies will last only three more days. He was counting on a quick victory. If Kalathan prevents a river crossing now and delays the attack he will have to retreat.
“Perhaps she is,” said Theo. “But then perhaps she is saving her people from dying for her father’s stubborn arrogance. Cedric could have had exactly what he wanted but he insisted on more. If we stop them now and he surrenders, we will still open the Sapphire Road.”
“Really?” asked Kaspar.
“We gave our word,” said Theo.
“In exchange for me.”
“We should have done it anyway,” said Theo. “Father should have done it, long ago.”
“I still don’t like to think that she is a traitor,” said Kaspar. “And if her father finds out I can’t imagine what he will do to her.”
“She is wise, I think. That is what leaders have to do, constantly – choose a lesser of two evils. She chose to act for the soldiers and her people rather than for her father. I admire that.”
“Me too,” said Kaspar, putting the note back into his pocket.
“I am so glad you are safe, Kaspar,” said Theo, turning to his brother, suddenly feeling overcome with gratefulness.
“So am I, Theo,” said Kaspar, clasping his brother’s shoulder. He leant forward to peer out of the window of the loft. “Something is happening, Theo. What is that?”
Theo looked too. There was movement amongst the archers, and shouting that the brothers could hear even from the tower. “It must be the army,” said Theo, a cold dread washing over him. “The archers can see them coming.”
Moments later he and Kaspar had descended the tower and run through the streets to the observation hut, another wooden structure built on stilts near the riverside in a patch of trees, concealed with branches as well as time had allowed. Silently they joined the king and Jarridius, who stood looking through a spyglass out of the slits in the front towards the bridge. The soldiers flooding over the bridge were running now, rather than marching, and on the town side officers hurried those who had already crossed out of the way as fast as they could. Already the riverside was lined with more archers behind rough ramparts, bows ready. And there were the fire machines too, Theo knew, loaded with the last of their powder. Before the Empire’s army reached the bridge, they would feel the force of everything Kalathan had left. 
“How close are they?” asked Theo, dreading the answer. 
“Only a few minutes. Cavalry, we think,” said Jarridius, putting down his spyglass and shaking his head. “We might have to bring it down sooner than we hoped.”
“No!” said Kaspar. “We can’t do it yet, not until they are all on this side!”
“We might need to,” said the king. He looked so old, Theo thought. So old and tired. He had not even put on his armour today, or his crown.
Kaspar stared out through the slits, at the bridge, at the men still running over it. Even in their haste there was no panic. The officers had full control, and the lines did not break.
“Are they ready to destroy it?” asked Theo.
“They are ready,” said Jarridius. “There is always a chance that it does not work, remember. The bridge is made of stone, after all.”
Theo nodded. Come on, he thought, his eyes fixed on the stream of men. Faster, faster!
But then it seemed as if it was going to be too late. The archers were shouting again, pointing out across the river. One of the fire machines shot out a flaming arrow, and Theo watched as it soared over the troops running over the bridge, landing somewhere beyond his vision.
Still the Kalathan troops came streaming over the bridge. Still, there was order even as the pace quickened, as the fire machines shot more arrows over their heads towards the enemy. And now, when Theo looked beyond the bridge to the other side, he could see the Empire’s army, a thundering darkness spilling steadily over the landscape.
“God help us,” breathed the king. Theo could see the end of the line of Kalathan troops now, close to the bridge. He could not tell if they would make it in time.
“What is that?” asked Jarridius, pointing at the advancing line and lifting his spyglass to his face again.
“It looks like … chariots,” said Kaspar.
“It is,” said Jarridius.
“A whole line of them,” said Theo.
“They are coming too fast,” said the king. “We need to give the signal!”
“Not yet, Father!” said Kaspar. “There are too many still on the other side!”
“We must, Kaspar,” said Theo, his heart sinking.
“But we can defend the bridge!” said Kaspar. “Please, don’t do it yet!”
“Kaspar,” said Theo. “We can’t. We need to do it now.”
“No!” Kaspar was crying now, tears streaming down his face, his eyes fixed on the scene before him.
“Give the order,” said the king, in a quiet voice.
Jarridius shouted down to the ground, and a soldier ran across to the bridge. The chariots were gaining ground fast. Almost all the men were across now, but it was clear that they would not all make it.
There was a shout from below, and a loud trumpet signal, and Theo watched as the troops still on the other side fanned out to the sides, running along the banks to get away from the bridge. “Any minute now,” said Jarridius, and for a moment, the bridge that had been teeming with men all day was empty.
But the chariots kept coming.
“What is happening?” asked Theo. 
“I don’t know.” Jarridius’ expression was tense. “Something must be wrong.”
The chariots seethed forward. The fire machines continued their volley, and some overturned in clouds of dust and smoke. But something was wrong. Men scurried near the bridge, shouting to each other. 
“It hasn’t worked,” said Kaspar. “They will storm the bridge!”
Theo stood, transfixed, as if he was watching something in a dream. Chariots poured over the bridge, and the shouting and smoky chaos increased. Still, although his nerves were tensed as tight as steel, there was no explosion. The bridge remained, stubbornly solid, carrying the Empire’s army over towards them. 
“We need to get you away from here, my lord,” said Jarridius, taking the king’s arm. 
“No,” said Theoland, shaking his head, staring out at the battle that had almost reached them. “I need to see this. I will not leave.”
“But my lord—” 
“No! Take Theo and Kaspar away. If something happens to me, you will have them. But I will not leave.”
Theo knew he had to go. In a situation like this, it was wise not to be in the same place as his father. 
He made his way down the steps. The noise was intense now, cries and shouts mingling with the clash of steel on steel, the screaming of the fire machines, the clatter of wheels on the stone road. The first chariots had made it over the bridge and it was only a matter of time before the army followed, the thousands and thousands of men Theo had seen on the road, the might of Cedric’s Empire. The bridge stood, obstinately, obscured now in smoke and men as he craned his neck to look. 
“Come, my lords,” said the soldier tasked to take them away. “We must go.”
It was torture, to sit in the bunker with Kaspar, hearing the battle in the distance, knowing men were dying, suffering, giving their lives for Kalathan. The soldier gleaned what news he could every now and then, but it was never anything encouraging. The bridge was blocked with bodies and overturned chariots but the enemy had cleared it and continued the advance. The archers were picking off men as they streamed over the bridge, but there were always more to fill the gaps. And then something changed. 
“Is it over?” asked Kaspar. “I don’t hear the explosions.”
Theo shook his head. He had been dreading this moment. “No, Kas,” he said. “We have run out of powder. It’s over.”
Kaspar put his face in his hands and wept like a child, and it was all Theo could do not to do the same. 
“I don’t understand!” said Kaspar. “Why didn’t the bridge go down?”
“I don’t know,” said Theo. “It just … wasn’t meant to be.”
“What will we do now?” he sobbed, barely able to get the words out. “Will our army retreat?”
“I assume so,” said Theo. 
The soldier reappeared at the entrance to the bunker. “The General has sounded the retreat, my lords. We should move, ahead of them.”
Theo got up, slowly. He didn’t want to move. He wanted to lie down on the sandy floor of the rough shelter and close his eyes. But he could not give in to weakness now. If the invasion was going to continue now, if Kalathan was going to be overrun with Empire soldiers taking whatever they could get, he needed to be strong. 
The princes emerged from the bunker into the daylight. “There are horses waiting for you, my lords,” said the soldier. “We should—”
He never finished what he had been going to say. There was an explosion then, an explosion mightier than any Theo had ever heard. He covered his head, cowering instinctively. But even before it was over, he knew what it was. 
“The bridge!” he cried. “Kaspar – the bridge!”
Kaspar’s face lit up, his hands still over his ears, his face still streaked with tears. “Really? All is not lost, then!”
“No!” said Theo, drawing his sword and beginning to run. The soldier and Kaspar ran after him. If this was it, if his desperate prayers had been answered, he had to see it. 
The observation hut was still in place. There was chaos, still, the air thick with cries and clashes. He ran up the stairs, two at a time. 
“Theo,” said the king, turning to him, his face alight with hope. He handed him the spyglass. “Look.” 
Theo gazed at what had once been the bridge. On the other side, Empire troops and horses swarmed in chaos. He saw the lofty arches reduced to jagged, broken walls, massive pieces of the dying bridge still falling at intervals into the river, great splashes of water rising impossibly high as they did.
“Look on this side, beside the pillar nearest to us,” said Jarridius. Theo did so, and then he saw it:  a glint of metal and a flash of purple behind the clouds of dust and smoke, the darker purple of Cedric’s distinctive personal standard. 
“Cedric?” he breathed. 
“Cedric,” said the king. Theo shook his head, still staring through the glass. The bridge was gone; the army had been stopped. And of Cedric, Lord of the Western Empire, Potentate of the City of Cedropolis and Emperor of all lands from the Alpine Mountains in the west to the Parsian desert in the east, there was nothing to be seen at all but a golden chariot wheel, spinning aimlessly where it had lodged between two great stones.

Chapter 43
Dear Trina
Cedric is dead and the Empire’s generals have sworn loyalty to Lydia. Fighting on the other front has ceased too. We have met with her and agreed on the details of the trading zone. The war is over.
Jameth is doing a little better and the priests say there is hope that he will live and recover, although I have seen his wounds and I know that if he does he will never play a flute or shoot a bow again. I am so relieved about all of it, but all I can think about is that now I can go back to Kalathan City. Will you be there, Trina? When I pray, I should be thanking God for helping us, but all I can do is ask him to let me see you again, just one more time.
I love you, Trina. I have only told you once, when I was drunk. Father has agreed to change the laws about devilclaws, but that is as far as he will go. There is no point even asking for more. I cannot keep both Kalathan and you, and it breaks my heart.
Love Theo
It was late at night when they got back to the city. Theo was so exhausted that he hardly noticed when the carriage stopped. He had slept a lot, along the way, despite the jostling and the roughness of the roads. It took three days to get back, travelling almost every daylight hour and some of the night, changing horses every chance they had. This was the way to travel, he thought, as the miles passed steadily under the feet of the horses. He, Kaspar and Father travelled together with Jarridius, mostly silent through the long hours. Jandrin had refused to leave Jameth in Sundtar and had stayed behind, promising to return as soon as Jameth was well enough to travel. If he is ever well enough, Theo had thought despondently. The memory of his suffering, of their hellish escape through the woods lingered on the edges of his mind constantly. When he thought of it, he prayed. God, please don’t let him die. We need him. But even as he prayed, he felt conflicted – so many men had died on that battlefield. Dazmar’s family, although they did not know it yet, had lost him to a war that was not even their own. So many families mourned. Why should theirs be any different?
But then they were home, and he was trying to get out of the carriage without his legs buckling under him. He took a great breath of air as his feet met the stone paving of the courtyard, the smell of home, of roses and dew and rich earth filling his nostrils and causing his eyes to well up. It had been so long since the morning they had left for the pilgrimage, thinking they would be back in little more than a week. It had been months. It was summer now, and so much had happened that the memory of that day seemed to be something from the memory of another person entirely. He had, in the time since he had last seen the palace, known terror and thirst and fear for his life. He had killed those four men. He had seen a girl slaughtered and Dazmar’s staring eyes only moments after he died. He had lost his faith in the Temple and found the beginnings of faith in something else. He had uncovered the lies, the tyranny and the foolishness of his forefathers. He had felt both the unbearable burden and the humbling honour of his birthright. He had found Trina and loved her.
She was not there, to meet him. He knew there was no reason she would be. For all he knew she was not here at all. Father had not said what had happened to her, and he had not asked. He had carefully measured every conversation with his father in which she had been mentioned, hoping to find a change of attitude, hoping against hope to find something he could hang on to. But there was nothing – Father spoke of her briefly and without any respect, as if the incredible thing she had done was no more than what was expected of her. He had said nothing about the shrine sacrifice at all. God, according to Father, had given them victory. In the end, they had pleased the Spirit somehow, and had been rewarded with their triumph. But Theo knew that Trina’s courage had helped to save them, more than once. Without her, Kalathan would have been mourning today, not celebrating. It was luck, if there was such a thing, and determination, and persevering through the worst, that had saved his and his brothers’ lives. And maybe God too, in all of it, just not the way that Father thought. But he was too tired to think about that now.
Mother was there, though, in a robe over her nightgown, her hair falling all over her shoulders, clasping him to her, and he felt as the familiar comfort of her embrace surrounded him that he could have wept like a baby. But he kept his composure, pretending to be supporting her into the warm comfort of a firelit parlour, when really, he just wanted to cling to her as if he was a child again.
They sat together for a while, he, Kaspar and his parents, on the velvet couches he had forgotten about, Father’s hand clasping Mother’s as she listened to Kaspar talking enough for both of them. Kaspar told her about Jameth, and how Jandrin had shocked them all and turned into a capable, caring nurse, and reassured her that Maikal and Ben were safe and happy in Ahrania. He even said he was prepared to travel himself to fetch them as soon as plans could be made. Good old Kaspar, thought Theo, watching his brother across the room. But he did not mention Dazmar. They would tell Mother about him another time, when he felt stronger. For this evening, it was all too much.
Then Father left them for his bedroom, and as soon as he had gone Mother was whispering something to a servant.
And then a door opened, and she was there, embracing Kaspar first as Theo sat, frozen on the velvet couch, trying again not to embarrass himself and cry in his relief.
“Theo,” she said, sitting down beside him and lifting her hand to his face. “You are home.”
He could say nothing as he clung to her. He was a man now; his mother’s comfort and support were precious, but they could only take him so far. This was what he needed; a woman who cared for him, who could see he was hurting and sad and exhausted and knew exactly what to say. But even as he held her close, he knew it was just a brief mercy. She had tried to tell him not to hope, but he had not listened. Until he had seen his father again, until he had been reminded of the depth of the king’s prejudice and the weight of his own destiny, he had not quite let it go. He had asked for an end to persecution and for the freedom to step away from the Temple, but when it came to the royal line, to the blood of future kings, he knew that as long as Father lived, he could not ask for this.
“I am so glad you are still here,” he managed to say. She looked so beautiful to him, the soft blue-grey dress she wore reflecting in her eyes, her hair prettily braided, her face rosy and healthy. And she smelled wonderful too, of jasmine and roses, he thought.
“I am still here,” she said, his hands clasped in hers. “But not for long. I was waiting for you.”
“When will you go?” he asked, dreading the answer.
“Not tonight,” she said, kissing his forehead.
Theo hardly noticed his mother and Kaspar leaving the room. He rested his head on Trina’s shoulder and he wept, for the war and the killing and the suffering, for his brother’s agony, for the sadness and the hardship that was still to come. He wept for the king and his great heavy burden, and for the knowledge that it was his to share. He knew more intimately what it was like, now, to have the fate of a nation in his hands. Trina had to go, to make her own life away from the palace. But knowing it, knowing that it was inevitable, did not make his heart ache any less.
There were two more days, days that he barely remembered afterwards, they felt so short. He slept more than he wanted to, rising to find Trina waiting for him. The king was unwell for a few days and kept to his bed, and Theo was thankful. He did not want to have to hide Trina’s presence, but it would help no one if the king were to find out now. Theoland was tired and in pain from an old back injury, but his struggling went deeper than that. Despite the victory in Sundtar he was bitter and angry – with the Emperor, with Shihazar and Asnan and everyone who he felt had betrayed him, with Theo for squeezing those promises out of him and for abandoning the Temple. He was angry with himself, too, Theo knew, for his part in causing the war. For the days before Trina left, he did not leave his room and would see no one but Mother, and Theo was grateful for it.
He and Trina sat together on his balcony on the last evening, looking out over the courtyard. It was high enough that they could see over the palace wall to the city. Theo leant his head back on his chair and looked over the rooftops at the familiar skyline rapidly growing darker as the sun set, at the city which was still its own, no longer in danger of being another of Cedric’s possessions. Trina was beside him, her hands in her lap.
“It was so strange,” he said, “to be so weak when we were prisoners, and then to have so much power to influence what happened afterwards. It’s so strange to know that if things had been different, Kalathan might have lost its independence.”
“I can’t imagine what it must be like, Theo,” she said. “But it is a privilege, isn’t it? To have that power and to know that you can use it for good?”
He nodded. “Most of the time I don’t think I can do it. Most of the time I think it must all just be a mistake, that this is my destiny.”
“It’s not a mistake, Theo. I don’t think you believe that.”
“No,” he sighed. “But will I be any better than Father? He has failed so … spectacularly. Everything that has happened, he could have prevented. I am realising that much of a king’s life must be spent anticipating disaster and trying to avoid it.”
“There are promises, in the Bible,” she said, picking up the worn, stained New Testament and Psalms that Theo had brought, all the way from Ahrania to Cedropolis to the battlefield and now here. “That if a man seeks wisdom, humbly, he will find it.”
“You have been reading it?”
“Yes,” she said. “Do you remember when you asked me what I thought of the king’s divine right, and I told you I wasn’t sure there was a God?”
“I remember,” he said, smiling.
“I know now that the God I prayed to as a child is real. And he is the Christian God. When I read this, I recognise him.”
“I know what you mean,” he said. “In the Emperor’s palace, Dazmar told me …” he rubbed his face, taking a deep breath. It was so hard to talk about Dazmar. “He told me what the Christians believe. He showed me, from that book. And I felt the same – that I recognised God, somehow. That I wanted to know him, not just worship him and be blessed by him, as I used to when I still believed in the Temple God.”
“Do you have another Bible?” she asked. “Can I keep this?”
“Of course,” he said. “I will find more. And I will make sure that more of it is translated into Kalath. I have so much to learn.”
“It will be so hard, Theo. Will the people accept you as their king if you reject the Temple?”
“I will only know that when it happens. For now, Father has agreed to allow me to step away from all that,” he said. “I forced him to agree to it. I made him promise before we got Kaspar back from Cedric.”
“That was brave, Theo. It must have been hard to stand up to him.”
“I am tired of fighting, Trina. I could just leave it all to him and run away with you.” He turned to her again, reaching across to take her hand.
“No, Theo,” she said, weaving her fingers through his. “This is where you belong. We both know that.”
She looked into his eyes, and although it was sad and awful and heart-breaking for it all to be over after everything that had happened, they both knew it was foolish to think of any way to go forward but this way. He belonged at the palace, and she did not. She had to go.
He came to see her off the next morning. It was misty, still dark and cold enough that he shivered as he stood outside the stables. She was ready, her small bundle of possessions packed into the carriage, the horses and the driver waiting.
“I will see my family soon,” she said, smiling, her cheeks rosy in the chilly air, her hair escaping already from under the fur-lined hood of the travelling cape his mother had given her.
“And then you will find your farm.”
“I will, thanks to you and your father. And I will be happy.” She believed it; he could see that. There was loss, in this moment, but not all was lost. She had a future, more of a future than she could have hoped for before it had all begun, and he was glad for her.
“I hope you will be happy, Trina.”
“I hope you will be too, Theo.”
“It probably isn’t wise to … keep in touch.”
She shook her head. “No. This is good-bye, then.”
“It hurts, Trina.” 
She nodded, her hand on her heart. 
“I won’t forget.” Theo’s voice faltered as he said it. He reached out and took her hands, which were ice-cold in his.
“Neither will I,” she said. “Thank you, Theo, for loving me while you could, and for letting me go now. Thank you for saving my life, and for giving me a new one. I am so grateful.”
He swallowed.  “I’m grateful too, for so many things. I just … can’t think of them now.”
And then there was one last embrace, one last gut-wrenching pulling apart, and she turned away, stepping up into the carriage. He stood back as the servant closed the door and the driver clicked to the horses. The wheels clattered over the stones, and he put his hand over his heart, fighting back a feeling of hopelessness. There was no other way. He had accepted that, but it felt that it was more than just a woman he had loved driving away towards the South. It felt, ironically, as if the price of choosing to pursue his destiny was losing the only person who could help him to realise it.
He turned back towards the palace, walking slowly. As he crossed the grass and neared the building he looked up as it appeared out of the mist, the windows of the east wing glowing faintly as the sun began to rise behind him. A new life, here in the city, was about to begin for him. Trina, he believed, had done her part to end the deceit of the Curse of Kalathan: she was off now to enjoy her reward and perhaps it was up to him to continue what she had begun. He turned around towards the faint glow on the horizon, but the curly spire of the Temple was not visible yet. No more, he thought, clenching his fists at his sides, would Kalathan be a place where truth was sacrificed for the sake of tradition. No more would Kalathan be a land of outward beauty hiding deception and injustice. No – Kalathan deserved more. The Temple and its lies had stolen love from his life, and in that moment he felt sure that he would never find it again as long as he lived. But he would make his sacrifice worth the pain. He would work for truth and for faith, with all his heart, for Kalathan and for the God he now knew was with him, giving him the strength he needed for the task. Kalathan, he understood in that moment, was not cursed. 
Through suffering and war his beloved land had been opened to the truth. 
Through pain, so had he. 
And it would not, Theo vowed as he watched the rising sun fight to break through the mist, come to nothing. 
The End
Before you go …
Hi Reader!
Thank you first of all for taking a chance on this story – I hope you enjoyed your journey to Kalathan as much as I did! 
If you liked this book I would be very grateful if you would leave a review,  even if it is just one sentence. Every review makes a difference and helps other readers discover the series.
If you would like to be notified of new releases or special offers, you are welcome to sign up for my mailing list here on my website. 
I love feedback from readers so feel free to say Hi via Facebook or my blog. 
Lastly, please enjoy this teaser for the second book in The Kalathan Chronicles, Brothers of Kalathan!

Brothers of Kalathan
Chapter 1
It was early evening, still hot in the city, dull clouds hanging heavy over the muggy streets. The slight young woman slipped out of the doorway, clutching her patchwork bag to her chest, looking around the dingy, dirty alley to make sure that no one had seen her before she set off briskly along the pavement. As she walked she slung the bag across her shoulder, adjusting her headscarf to hide a strand of honey-blonde hair that had slipped out from under it. Her long skirt swished at her calves, her simple buckled shoes tapping against the stones. The meeting had gone on a little longer than planned, and Korbin would be wondering where she was. 
She hurried through alleys littered with refuse and cluttered with little children and lines of ragged clothes hanging from windows, until she reached the wider streets, where the drains ran under the roads and the buildings were not so closely packed. Here the last of the sun reached the street, and she turned her face up to it, relieved to be exiting the slums. Soon she passed the back of the palace, where shouts and interesting odours wafted from the kitchens, and almost broke into a run as she passed the flower stalls and the university. When the lingering smell of drains was replaced with the scent of spices and familiar herbs, she knew she was home. 
Parting the bead curtain, Mira slipped into the noisy tea house, and made her way past the clusters of small tables towards the back of the shop. She waved quickly to the dark-haired woman serving customers from behind the long counter, then pushed open the door at the back of the shop to enter the courtyard beyond. Closing the door quickly behind her, she leant against it for a moment to catch her breath. Ah, her roses, creeping over the trellises and spilling out of their pots, the tall birdcage where she could see little Kanasti hopping along his perch, the pretty table and benches Korbin had made beneath the shade of the granadilla vine – it was always so good to be home! The roses looked so pretty in the now-pink evening light, almost every bush blooming a different colour at this time of the year. One of her cats slinked up against her leg, and she bent down to scratch him behind his ear. “Not now, kitty,” she said, softly. “I’m late! I need to work!”
“Mira? Is that you?” Korbin’s deep voice echoed out from the printing room that led off to the left. She could hear the metal stirrer clicking against the sides of the stone bowl as he mixed the ink. 
“I’ll be there in a minute, Korbin!” she called, going over to the pump and crouching down beside the bucket of water beneath it to wash her hands and splash her hot face. 
The printing room was cool, the trays of type already set out. Korbin turned as she came in, his apron on over the wide bulk of his broad chest, his hair tied back, a small smudge of ink already on his cheek above his full beard. 
“Sorry I’m late,” she said, taking her apron from the hook by the door. “The meeting went on a little long today.”
“Not late at all, Kipki,” he said. “Your work is important, and the copy has only just arrived. Let’s hope it’s not as full of errors as the last time.”
“Five hundred again?” she asked, leaning over the table to peer at the sheets of untidy, blotted script sent by the scribes every week.  
“Yes,” he said. “And an extra forty for the palace, as usual.”
“Best get going then,” she said, trying to sound cheery even though she was tired already. “It’s going to be a long night.”
“So why was your meeting late?” he asked, after an hour of silent work. Mira looked up from the tray on which she was painstakingly setting type. 
“There’s always so much to do,” she said, stretching her cramped fingers. “Too many to help. And we didn’t start on time. There was an arrest at one of the houses near our meeting place, so the area was crawling with Imperial guards. We had to take out our bits of sewing, just in case the house was raided.”
“Who was arrested? Not one of yours, I hope?”
She shook her head. “No one I know. A student at the University, I heard, in trouble for spreading seditious literature. But I saw the flyer and I didn’t think it was seditious in the least. It was just a little piece about that new independent state splitting off from Parsia.”
“I understand how that could be seen as a threat to the Empire,” Korbin said. “Independence is a foul word to many of the nobility, remember. They are almost as afraid of small nations demanding to govern themselves as they are of an end to slavery.”
“Well then, those nobles had better brace themselves,” Mira said, lifting her chin, and wiping her forehead with her wrist to prevent smearing ink on herself. “Because Lydia is the Empress now and it is only a matter of time until she ends slavery for good. In the meantime, our little society will keep pretending to sew while we help those who cannot wait. Lady Norvia’s latest boy finally had enough. He got away last night and made it to one of the safe houses. We’re hoping we can get him up to the monastery and out of the Empire in a few days.”
Korbin raised an eyebrow. “Lady Norvia won’t be happy about that.”
Mira nodded, reaching the end of a row and pausing to stretch her back. “We know. Her other slaves will suffer. But we couldn't blame him. You should have seen his back, Korbin. The housekeeper beat him every day, even when he had done nothing wrong. He’s only fifteen or sixteen – young and determined enough to start a new life somewhere else.”
“Thanks to you and your sewing club,” Korbin said, leaning over the press to inspect a cog on the machine. “And rather don’t tell me too many details. The less I know the better.”
“Sorry,” she said, smiling up at the big man. “I wish every slave had a master like you. No one would ever need to run away.”
“We are all redeemed slaves, Kipki,” he said, sighing a little as he sat down opposite her. “The Bible says so. I bought extra flour today, and a sack of dried fruit. If you can find a way to get it to the safe house—”
“Oh, thank you Korbin!” Mira flew up from her seat to run around the table and fling her arms around Korbin’s neck. 
“Whoa,” he laughed, patting her arm as she released him and went back to her chair. “You never ask me for anything, so I am glad to have guessed something useful.”  
The two worked on, into the night. Prisca, who served customers and helped to manage the tea house, brought them a meal of bread and cheese when she locked up for the evening, and after that they worked in silence, as quiet settled slowly over the city. A little past midnight, the heat finally began to lift as they finished printing the first side of the news sheet. Mira had just begun to read over the copy for the reverse, when she saw something that made her gasp. “Korbin!” she said, picking up the sheet of paper, her eyes wide. “Did you read all this copy before we began?”
He nodded, not looking up from the machine. 
“Why didn't you tell me?”
He shrugged. “I’m still taking it in myself.”
“But .. this is wonderful! Is it really true? No more marking, or persecution? Legal rights for all of them? Just like that?”
He nodded. “Looks like it. Devilclaws may no longer be legally persecuted in Kalathan. There have been rumours, but I didn't think it would happen so soon.”
“Do our friends in Karatas know yet?”
“Probably not.”
“We must tell them! All those prayers, Korbin, the years and years of prayers!”
“When this job is done and we have rested tomorrow we can go out to see them.” Korbin held out his left hand for the sheet of copy. “It may be too late for me but some of the other exiles might want to return.”
“To return … to Kalathan?”
Mira’s heart constricted as she said it. As she passed the sheet over to him, she could see his mark, the thin blue vertical line inked on the inside of his wrist beneath his rolled-up sleeves. In Kalathan, that mark meant he was a devilclaw, his left-handedness a curse, a sign of bad luck. It had cost Korbin his family and his future as the heir of a large estate. But that had been fourteen years ago, when just as he was about to become an adult he had been betrayed and exiled. He had lived in Cedropolis, capital city of the great Western Empire ever since then, and had made a new life here. The Kalathan Temple priests who had held him down to make that mark had intended it for evil, he often told her, but in the end God had intended it for good.
“Yes,” he said, and she realised then that she had been so wrapped up in her own concerns that she had not noticed his heavy mood. “Some might want to return to Kalathan.”
“Is it … really … too late for you?”
He looked up from the page, and for a moment Mira saw unbearable sadness there. They had both lost so much, and she knew that just as it was for her, the damage was done. New laws and an end to legal oppression could never make up for what had happened in between. 
“I may be allowed to return now, but there is this,” he said, gesturing with his arm to the press, to the tea house and their home beyond. “How could I give it all up and go home to the place that spat me out as if I was nothing?”
“I don’t want to go to Kalathan,” she said, quietly. 
“I didn't think you would. And you are my responsibility.”
“You don’t need to stay because of me.”
“And leave you here, a masterless slave? I wouldn’t do that to you, Mira.”
“We don’t have to think about it now,” Mira said, feeling very relieved. “We need to finish this job, get some sleep, then go to Karatas to tell the others. We can think about what it all means for us afterwards.”
Korbin sat back, hands behind his head, his eyes closed. “Ah, Mira,” he said. “Whatever would I do without you?”
“You would do perfectly well,” she said, pertly. “All I ever do is bring you is more problems.”
“At least you can cook,” he grinned. “And knit, sew, grow flowers, tell me when my trousers don't match my shirt …”
“And set type,” she said, her eyes back on her work. “Come, Korbin, let’s get this done, or we won’t get any sleep at all.”
The two were silent after that. When the type was set for the second page they brought out the previously printed paper, placed each piece blank-side-down on the tray, then brought down the heavy platten and moved the sturdy bar across to press it down. Just before the sun rose Korbin lifted the last page off the board, and when the dawn came and the messenger boy Ozkan arrived at the door of the tea house, the parcels were ready, wrapped in brown paper and tied with string. The boy ran off along the still-dark street, heading for the palace and the fruit market with his first heavy bundles. Prisca arrived soon after that, immediately beginning to bustle around the tea house kitchen as Mira and Korbin packed up after the night’s work. 
Mira washed her ink-stained hands, took off her apron and obediently ate the bread and butter Prisca put in front of her. She was used to working all night once a week, and she didn't mind the tiredness and the odd feeling of going to bed straight after breakfast. But today, after both the stressful meeting with her sewing club and this momentous news, she felt more tired than usual. She had a feeling that this was all the beginning of something, the start of a new chapter for the little Kalathene community that had welcomed her so warmly thirteen years before when she had been a tiny, sick, frightened child. She barely remembered Kalathan at all, the memories she did have a disturbing mix of both happy ones and nightmares. But she was a Kalathene after all; she could not escape that. The city was her home but it had not always been. Somewhere out there to the east was the vast, proud country that had given her life. When she had eaten she crawled into her little bed in her own neat, tidy room, pulled her blanket up over herself and closed her eyes. As the sun rose over the city, making poor Ozkan swelter as he made his deliveries, Mira slept, dreaming as she did of Kalathan itself rising from the map, morphing strangely into a faceless shape that reached out to embrace her. 

Chapter 2
“Oh come on, Hadrus!” Jandrin said, as his opponent dropped his sword and bent over double, leaning on his knees as he gasped for breath. “You can't tell me you’re tired already!”
“I … can’t keep up with you,” panted the boy, wiping his pale face with his sleeve, his dark hair already wet with perspiration. “You’re older than I am, Jandrin, and taller too!” Jameth, watching his brother and the Empirian youth from where he leant against the fence of the palace sparring ring, smiled to himself. Hadrus was only seventeen, and at least a head shorter than the twins. He was, in fact, a contrast to them in almost every way – his hair black and short where theirs was golden and long on their collars, his skin much darker than theirs, his shoulders narrow and his skinny arms lacking the strength necessary to be any good at swordplay. Despite his status as the Empress Lydia’s first cousin and only blood relative, he lacked confidence and had followed the princes around like an adoring puppy since they had arrived early in the summer three months before. The more Jandrin treated him like an annoying insect, the more he begged and wheedled to ride and hunt with them, and to accompany them on sightseeing trips and diplomatic visits whenever his controlling father, Natius, would allow him. Jameth did not mind – he was used to having younger brothers around and he had to admit that being forced to communicate with Hadrus had vastly improved his shaky Empirian. But it did seem that the more Jandrin teased and insulted him, the more he seemed to crave their company.
“You are heir to the throne of the Empire, you weasel!” Jandrin poked at Hadrus’ arm with his practice sword, making him cringe backwards. “Pick that up and fight! What kind of a man are you, collapsing like a grandfather after five minutes? What would you do in a real battle?”
“I’m tired!” Hadrus whined, stepping backwards away from Jandrin. “Fight with your brother for a while and let me rest. I’ll try again when I’ve caught my breath, I promise!”
“All right,” Jandrin said, shaking his head. He stepped forward to pick up the sword that Hadrus had dropped on the ground and held it out to Jameth. “Your turn, Jay. Show this rodent how it’s done.”
Jameth hopped down from the fence, taking the sword. “Easy on him, Jan,” he said, quietly, in Kalath so that Hadrus wouldn’t understand. “As you said, he’s the heir. Perhaps you shouldn’t be calling him names.”
“I still can’t believe that squirrel is Lydia’s only relation,” Jandrin said grumpily, looking over to where Hadrus was standing with one of the palace servants, his hand over his chest as if he was still struggling to breathe. “God help the Empire if something happens to her and they put a crown on his head.”
Jameth tossed the sword up into the air a little, testing the weight and catching it deftly. “It’s not as if he would actually rule himself,” he said, putting his weak arm behind his back and bending his knees slightly to face his brother. “Not until he’s older, surely.”
“That’s what makes me so mad,” Jandrin said, lunging towards him. Jameth stepped back quickly, avoiding the blow and swiping at Jandrin’s side in one agile movement. “He’s not a bad fellow really, but I can't see him ever being able to stand up to his father. And Natius–” Jandrin attacked again, almost managing to make contact with Jameth’s chest this time– “will be a tyrant worse than Cedric.”
“Strong words, brother,” Jameth said. His bad arm was aching and burning as it did most of the time, and he had to concentrate hard not to let it distract him. Before his injury he and Jandrin had been so equally matched they hardly bothered to keep track. Now, even though his wounds had healed and he had returned to what appeared to most people to be full health, holding his own against his brother in the sparring ring was a distant memory. He kept it up for a few minutes before he stepped away, shaking his head. “Sorry, Jan,” he said, as a cramp seized his stomach, forcing him to drop the sword and lean on the fence.
Jandrin dropped his own sword and approached. “What is it?” he asked. “Your arm?”
Jameth shook his head, straightening slowly as the spasm passed. “No. The pain was bad last night so I took two drops of kamsinth instead of one. Sometimes this happens when I do that.” He turned away from Jandrin again as another spasm gripped him, not wanting his brother to see his face. 
“Jameth?” Hadrus had come over now too. “Should I ask Grigor to fetch a doctor?”
“No, no!” Jameth took a deep breath and stood up straight again, but he felt dizzy and light-headed. He kept a firm hold of the fence pole. “No doctors. It’s just the medicine for my pain disagreeing with me a little. I’ll be all right in a moment.”
“Enough fencing for today, Hadrus,” Jandrin said curtly, waving his hand at the boy. “Ask Grigor to show you some exercises to strengthen your arms and we can try again another day. Perhaps you should ask the armory for a lighter sword, too.”
Hadrus seemed to get the message, turning his disappointed face away from them. 
“Lords go back to apartment?” asked the young servant, Grigor, who despite the fact that the brothers could converse reasonably well in Empirian insisted on speaking to them in his broken Kalath. He had learnt it, he said, at his previous job in a Kalath-style tea house, and he enjoyed speaking it. “I bring something?”He pushed his floppy dark hair out of his face, which was rather unfortunately always covered in uncomfortable-looking red spots. 
“Yes, thank you,” Jameth said. “Perhaps you could arrange some tea, Grigor. And some of that soup you got me yesterday.”
Grigor nodded enthusiastically, rushing off to pick up the swords to return to the armory. “You go home, lords!” he called, as he clutched them to his chest. “I bring food!” 
Jandrin and Jameth walked back towards the palace side by side, Jameth thinking that he had been unwise to try to fence today. His stomach was still tender, his arm and shoulder aching worse than usual as they made their way up the steps leading towards the three-storey block of apartments surrounding the square that bordered the vast palace.  They stopped to sit for a moment on the edge of the huge square fountain in the centre. Jameth leant over to dip his hands in the water and splash his face.
“I’m worried about you, brother,” Jandrin said, as they sat side by side looking out over the enormous arches that held up the stone building which had been their home for the past three months. “You were doing so well before we left home. You’ve got thinner since you started taking those herbs.”
“I was hardly sleeping, Jan,” Jameth said, remembering how he had paced his bedroom through the long, lonely hours, incessant burning pain preventing anything more than a few restless hours of fitful dozing. “Until that priest gave me the kamsinth I was desperate.”
“But you can't take it forever!” Jandrin looked so concerned that Jameth had to look away. “When was the last time you ate a proper meal?”
“I don't know,” Jameth said. “But you don't understand, Jan. Kamsinth is the only thing that has ever helped me sleep. You remember – all the healers and priests and potions and cleansings – nothing helped. You can't imagine what it was like before this.” He put his hand into his pocket and brought out the tiny glass bottle of opaque brown liquid. Even now, looking at it made him long for evening, where he could take his tumbler of water, add one, or perhaps two magical drops, watch it swirl its darkness through the water for a few seconds, then drink. It was terribly bitter, and most days he woke with the taste of it still in his mouth, but it was a small price to pay for the blessed weight of the lethargy that overtook him once he had drunk it. 
“You need to stop taking it,” Jandrin said. 
Jameth looked up, towards the old stone tower where he and his brothers had been imprisoned almost two years before. “Well, I can’t,” he said, after a while. “Do you know there was a night where I climbed up into the east tower of the palace at home and sat on the windowsill of that room at the top? I must have been there for an hour before I changed my mind.”
“What?” Jandrin stared at him, appalled. “You never told me that!”
“I wanted to die,” Jameth said. “That’s how crazy I felt. Kamsinth has saved me. A sore stomach feels like a small price to pay for sleep. I can live with pain during the day, when I know there will be relief at night. I can’t stop, Jan. You mustn't ask me again.”
Jandrin did not reply for a while. He sat, arms folded, frowning. “Maybe your body will adjust,” he said, eventually. “Maybe your stomach will get used to it.”
“That’s what I hope every day,” Jameth said. 
“If we were at home I would go to the Temple and pray for you,” Jandrin said, his voice faltering a little as he said it. “I would ask the Spirit of Victory to help you to triumph over your pain.”
Jameth hung his head, still holding the bottle in his hand. “Thank you, Jan,” he said, quietly. “But I don't believe God, or the Spirit, would do anything for me. I survived what happened on the battlefield, and I should be grateful for that.”
“You came back from the dead, Jay,” Jandrin said fiercely. “I’ll take you any way, as long as you’re alive.”
Jameth closed his eyes. It was hard to think about the despair he had felt that night on the windowsill and many times since. Kamsinth had helped, but he still lived with pain and loss every day. To look at Jandrin now, to see his brother strong and well and whole, his fingers moving nimbly over the frets of a lute, controlling a spirited horse with both strong arms, putting on his shirt and doing up the buttons without a struggle, was like looking at a ghost of himself, at the man he would never be. He did not resent it, and he meant it when he said he was grateful to be alive, but it was still hard to accept what he had become.
The brothers sat in silence for a while, and when Jameth opened his eyes and looked up he saw that they were no longer alone. Kilian, their Empirian tutor and translator, stood a few paces away, hands behind his back. His dark hair always neatly combed, his black and purple palace uniform so perfectly neat and pressed that Jandrin had once joked that he probably stood dead still in a corner most of the day to prevent creases, he was a stark contrast to the permanently hurried, often scruffy Grigor. 
“What do you want?” Jandrin asked harshly, swiping quickly at his eyes. 
“I have a message for you,” Kilian said, in Kalath, his usually blank expression darkening; omitting, as usual, to address them by their titles. 
“Spit it out then.” Jandrin stood up. “We don't have all day.”
“The Empress requests your company this evening after dinner,” Kilian said. “In her private chambers. She asks that you bring your parcha board.” He said it as if the words tasted bad in his mouth, and reached up to pat at his hair, his small black eyes flashing. 
“Aha,” Jandrin said, rubbing his hands together and winking mischievously at his brother. “She wants to see us, Jay! In her private chambers!”
“I doubt …” Kilian began, although he stopped when he saw Jandrin’s face. 
“You doubt what?” Jandrin snapped, stepping forward towards Kilian. 
“Nothing,” Kilian said, holding his rather weak chin up high. “I simply ask that you speak respectfully of the Empress.”
“Oh, I respect the Empress.” Jandrin took another step closer to Kilian, glaring down at him. Kilian was not as short as Hadrus or Grigor, but Jandrin was still taller. “The question is whether or not you respect me. You seem to have forgotten to use proper address.”
“I apologise,” Kilian said, coldly, pausing before he added: “My lord.” 
“You’re not sorry at all,” Jandrin said. “And we won’t be needing a lesson this afternoon. My brother is not well and I am tired of learning pointless lists of farm animals and irregular verbs.”
“But Madame–”
“Madame can go and jump in the river,” Jandrin said, rudely. “We don't want a lesson today and that’s that. Now go back to the kitchen or wherever you came from.”
“Jan,” Jameth said, feeling sorry for the poor young man. He had done well to teach them Empirian, even though he was a clerk in the counting house and not a teacher, and had already endured more than his share of Jandrin’s terrible attitude. Jandrin was upset now, and it was making him behave even worse. “Enough.”
“I did not come from the kitchen,” Kilian said, his tone icy. “I was–”
“Oh yes, I forgot,” Jandrin said, impatiently. “You single-handedly ran the finances of the entire Empire from your little desk.”
“Come,” Jameth said, pulling Jandrin away. “Thank you, Kilian. We will be there after dinner with our parcha board.” He tried to smile reassuringly at Kilian, but Jandrin began to walk off so fast that he had to trot to keep up. 
“Wait, Jan,” he said, as they neared the ground floor door of their apartment. 
“Idiot,” Jandrin was saying, as he pulled open the door and took the steps up to the living room on the first floor two at a time. By the time Jameth had walked up, he was lying on the sofa, hands up behind his head. 
“You don't need to be so rude to him,” Jameth sighed, sinking gratefully down into a comfortable chair. 
“Stupid cursed half-breed,” ” Jandrin said. “His mother is a devilclaw exile and his father a low-born Empirian. He should be grateful that I speak to him at all. Now where is Grigor with your soup? You are going to eat it, brother, even if I have to feed it to you myself.” He sprang up again. 
Jameth leant back on the chair and closed his eyes, hands on his stomach. The palace kitchens made a decent soup but what he really wanted was a bowl of tiprashka, the chicken stew with soft dumplings he and his brothers had eaten in their own palace nursery as children. He could almost taste it now, salty and savoury, perfectly spiced. He wanted to sit across from his mother as she poured tea for him, to talk to her about how he was feeling, to ask her advice on how to manage Jandrin and his embarrassing arrogance. He wanted to walk through the grassy courtyards among the roses, breathing in their fragrance. He wanted to speak Kalath, not Empirian which he felt had no poetry to it, no subtlety. He was managing better all the time, but it was tiring to be constantly translating in his head. Just another few months, he thought to himself, picturing the return journey down the river from Fahlat. They could stop at the herb market in Dehras to restock his kamsinth. 
Ah, home – he longed for it, but at the same time he knew that wherever he was, here in Cedropolis or in Kalathan with his family around him, his struggles would follow him. He would always have his scars, and his pain. He would never again hold a flute or a lute, never sleep without kamsinth, never again slip his arm around the waist of a pretty court girl to pull her close on the dance floor. He could barely dress himself or hold a fork at the dinner table. Who could ever love him, scarred and damaged as he was? His old pursuits seemed empty now. Victory did not bring peace, and plenty could not satisfy. He was as useless here as he would be anywhere else. 
When Jandrin returned with Grigor, Jameth sat up and put on a cheerful face, forcing down the soup and pretending to enjoy it. He drank his glass of warm, fragrant white-bell tea, its smooth sweetness calming his stomach. But when Jandrin left later to ride out with Hadrus, leaving him to rest before dinner at the palace and the appointment with Lydia, he sat in the window staring out over the spires and towers of the city, aching with loneliness and loss. 